ABSTRACT
Abstract Photocatalysis remains a crucial field to investigate. It is seen as a powerful tool which allows more efficient, relatively greener and economical chemical reactions. Nevertheless, catalysts usually include rare and pricy metals, with supplies being highly dependent on geopolitics. Thus, chemists turned their attention to alternatives such as natural products or organic molecules, conciliating performances, polyvalence and easy access. Among the promising candidates, polyaromatics rise as robust species and precursors of stable radicals which could be used as photocatalysts. Triangulenes are polycyclic hydrocarbons which are expected to shine in multiple fields such as spintronics, energy and data storage or semiconductors. This work reports the studies of photocatalytic reactions including the trioxotriangulene (TOT). Through the studies of three reactions ranging from sulfoxidation to dehalogenation of 4-bromoacetophenone, including the reduction of nitroaromatics, we discuss the performances, the polyvalence and the mechanism of the systems including this triangulene. As a proof of concept, we conclude this work with a description of “a sequential RBG photoredox catalytic system” where the three reactions are successively and selectively performed in a “one-pot” fashion.

A single tri-oxo-triangulene photocatalyst enables wavelength-controlled oxidation and reduction chemistry, allowing sequential red-, green-, and blue-light photoredox reactions in one pot.

INTRODUCTION
Photochemistry is a valuable tool in organic synthesis 1,2 because it allows desired molecules to be specifically targeted by matching irradiation wavelength to their vertical electronic transitions. Visible-light photochemistry is particularly attractive for sustainable applications; 3 however, most organic molecules have low or even zero absorbance in the 400-700 nm region. Photocatalysis addresses this gap by employing visible light-absorbing catalysts which in their excited states induce the intended transformations. 4 The catalyst transforms absorbed photons via different processes, e.g. (i) photosensitization, leading to direct energy transfer from the catalyst to the substrate, or (ii) single-electron transfer (SET).

Reduction and oxidation are the most employed reactions which can be performed photochemically using photoredox catalysts. Examples of such compounds reported in the literature 5-7 range from metals 8 to porphyrins 9 or ruthenium-based 10 complexes. While these compounds already demonstrated good performance, they include critical raw materials, often toxic or rare and expensive transition metals. Purely organic photoredox catalysts such as flavines 11 can provide a solution to most of these challenges and thus allow efficient and cleaner syntheses. However, they have inherent limitations such as chemical sensitivity due to their functional groups and chemical structure. Furthermore, reported photoredox catalysts are usually specific for a particular transformation, such as photoreduction under a certain redox potential, and cannot be used for a different process without extensive structural modifications. Thus, finding a robust, multipurpose and readily available organic photocatalyst remains an actual challenge in photochemistry.

Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons 12 (PAHs) are attractive potential photoredox catalysts. Their conjugated structure enhances stability, and their optical properties can be tuned by electron donating/accepting groups. Triangulene 13 and its derivatives are great examples of polybenzenoid molecules belonging to this class of compounds. Triangulene was first theorized by Clar in 1953 and proposed as a diradical non-Kékulé structure. In accordance with Ovchinnikov's rule 33 and Lieb's theorem, 34 this diradical displays a triplet ground state. At a supramolecular level, triangulene derivatives stack into a “pancake”-type π-π stacking 14 and the molecule's flat geometry leads to limited solubility and aggregation behavior. Since triangulenes were already studied for organic batteries, 15,16 they were also hypothesized to find applications 17,18 not only in spintronics, organic semi-conductors, and magnetic materials, but also in photocatalysis. 12-Hydroxydibenzo[cd,mn]pyrene-4,8-dione ( TOTH ) is one of the smallest derivatives of triangulene. 19 This molecule carries one hydroxyl and two carbonyl groups at the three edges. While the diradical is known to be highly reactive, the monoradical tri-oxo-triangulene ( TOT ) 20 is described to be very stable even in the presence of oxygen. These properties, in addition to the TOTH broad absorption profile in the visible region and the recently published 21 gram-scale synthesis, make it a very attractive candidate for photoredox catalysis. Even if TOT has been already used in redox catalysis for the reduction of oxygen, 22 no example of photocatalysis including triangulenes has been reported in the literature to the best of our knowledge and thus, their potential remains unexplored.

In this work, we report the first example of photoredox catalysis with TOTH and its active redox states. Several accessible redox states of TOTH allow it to engage in: 1) photooxidation of tetrahydrofuran (THF), 2) selective sulfoxidation of thioanisole and 3) photoreduction with a single catalyst precursor 23 even up to the challenging reductive dehalogenation of 4-bromoacetophenone. We show that by tuning the conditions, i.e. , irradiation wavelength and the presence of sacrificial electron donors, we can kinetically favor chosen reactions to achieve reaction selectivity. Moreover, these reactions can even be performed sequentially in a “one-pot” fashion only by adjustment of conditions. We discuss the mechanism of TOTH transformations under light irradiation, and we propose mechanisms of photoredox catalytic cycles.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
TOTH was synthesized according to the procedure published in 2019 by Ribar et al. 21 This compound is obtained as a deep blue powder well soluble in concentrated sulfuric acid (96%) or N , N -dimethylformamide (DMF) but poorly soluble in other solvents. TOTH was reported to adopt several redox/acidobasic states. 14 The acidic phenolic OH-group can be deprotonated by amines, e.g. , triethylamine (Et 3 N), which dramatically improves the solubility ( Fig. 1 ). This can be explained by the coulombic repulsion of generated anions disrupting aggregation via the π-π stacking.

The absorption spectra recorded in concentrated sulfuric acid (96%) exhibit a maximum absorption in the UV region (350 nm) as well as a broad band in the range of 500-630 nm, giving the solution a deep purple color. Similarly, in THF, the solution appears purple too, but the solubility is more limited, and the solution is quickly saturated. The absorption in THF is also broader with new absorption bands between 500 and 400 nm. Interestingly, the emission profile varies depending on the excitation wavelength used which indicates that the solution is a mixture of species. When TOTH is deprotonated by the addition of Et 3 N to THF or dissolved in DMF, the solution turns a clear light blue color, and the UV-vis spectra demonstrate an absorption shift towards higher wavelengths both in the UV and visible regions of the spectrum. Neutral solution in THF features red luminescence, similar to H 2 SO 4 solution, but the luminescence is no longer perceptible by the eyes upon deprotonation.

TOTH can be electrochemically converted in up to three redox states. 14 Cyclic voltammetry was performed in dry and degassed DMF with a Pt mesh as the working electrode and Ag/AgCl as the pseudo reference electrode calibrated with Fc/Fc + ( E 1/2 [Fc/Fc + ] = 0.4 V). The voltammogram (Fig. S1) showed reversible oxidation to neutral radical form TOT at 0.44 V. A reduction wave of TOTH is observed at -1.64 V to give the corresponding radical anion TOTH - ˙ . A second reduction wave follows at -2.1 V to give diradical anion TOTH 2 - ˙˙ , in which the two ketyl radicals cannot recombine. All these redox steps are reversible (Fig. S1), although consecutive voltammograms exhibit changes due to electroplating of TOTH on the electrode caused by a local change of pH upon solvent/residual water electrolysis. The third reduction wave overlaps with the solvent background but is clearly visible by square-wave voltammetry (Fig. S1b) at around -3.0 V and is irreversible. It must be noted that all redox states of TOTH are subject to acidobasic equilibria with their (de)protonated forms. In this way, neutral TOTH can deprotonate to TOT - ( Fig. 1 ). These equilibria prohibit the formation of polyanionic species during the catalytic process.

Spectro electrochemical investigation was performed by recording UV-vis absorption spectra during chronoamperometry set at defined potential values (Fig. S2). At a potential of -1.6 V, TOTH absorption features do not change significantly, and only weak bands develop between 390 and 500 nm as well as at around 730 nm. When a potential of -2.1 V is applied, the characteristic absorption peaks of TOT - at 360, 600, and 660 nm decrease and new absorption features develop in the whole visible region and at 310 nm; the spectral changes observed at -1.6 V are also present at the potential of -2.1 V.

The abundance of various TOTH redox states and their absorbance prompted us to perform EPR spectroscopy. A solution of TOTH in DMF did not show any signal; however, when it was irradiated with light, a strong and well-resolved signal was observable ( Fig. 3 ). The signal matches with a triple-folded symmetrical structure as expected for the neutral radical TOT (Fig. S3). This was observed regardless of whether the sample was irradiated with a red LED (620-625 nm) - where TOTH absorbs strongly - or a blue LED (440-450 nm) - where DMF solution shows negligible absorbance. The radical demonstrates remarkable stability as the signal does not show any decay after several minutes of measurement even in the presence of oxygen. Importantly, when the experiment was repeated in the presence of Et 3 N, no signal was observed under irradiation (440-450 or 620-625 nm).

Upon irradiation, neutral TOTH undergoes disproportionation to give TOT and TOTH - ˙ . The radical anion then dimerizes to TOT 2 H 2 by a ketyl mechanism, similar to the well-known benzophenone photochemical dimerization. 24,25 Traces of this dimer are detected by mass spectrometry (see Fig. S4). This reaction also explains gradual decolorization or color change observed in photocatalytic runs by disruption of conjugation of two TOTH units. In the presence of Et 3 N, the redox potential of the radical matches that of the amine, enabling single electron transfer (SET) between them. This process regenerates TOTH , while Et 3 N serves as a sacrificial electron donor and is oxidized to a radical cation. This then undergoes H abstraction to ultimately give iminium, which is hydrolyzed to diethylamine and acetaldehyde, both detected by GC-MS (Fig. S5) and NMR (Fig. S12) experiments. The TOT 2 H 2 dimer reacts further, either by second ketyl dimerization or supramolecular stacking, to give large aggregates evidenced by the appearance of the Tyndall effect (Fig. S6a). These aggregates were further confirmed by atomic force microscopy (AFM, Fig. S6b) and dynamic light scattering (DLS, Fig. S7, right). On the other hand, gel permeation chromatography (GPC) did not identify any species of molecular weight <700 g mol -1 (Fig. S7, left). This suggests that the dimer further aggregates non-covalently, e.g. by π-π stacking, and these aggregates disintegrate during the GPC separation on the column. Altogether, TOTH features several accessible photoactive redox states, which confirms its high potential for photoredox catalysis ( Fig. 2 ).

TOTH disproportionation upon irradiation opens the way to use it in photoredox catalysis. Three benchmark reactions were considered in this regard: photosulfoxidation of thioanisole to sulfoxide, nitro-group reduction, and reductive dehalogenation of 4-bromoacetophenone. Preliminary studies showed that, from the selected benchmark reactions, the deep-potential reductive dehalogenation of 4-bromoacetophenone is the most sensitive to reaction conditions ( e.g. oxygen). We have thus investigated the influence of varying reaction conditions on the yield ( Table 1 ).

Solvent choice influences the TOTH solubility and hence the course of all catalytic reactions. Altogether, seven common organic solvents were tested (entries 1-5, 7 and 12 in Table 1 ). While no conversion was observed in aromatic solvents (toluene and pyridine), a gradually increasing yield was observed in the series of acetonitrile (ACN), dichloromethane, ethanol, THF, and DMF, well corresponding with TOTH solubility in these solvents. The solvent choice influences the color and therefore the absorption spectrum. Moreover, some solvents were found non-innocent during the photocatalytic runs, e.g. , formation of γ-butyrolactone in THF mixtures after irradiation was confirmed by NMR and GC-MS (Fig. S9 & S10), which demonstrates that the TOTH acts as an oxidant. In fact, when pyridine or ACN was employed as a solvent, a very complex pattern of solvent-associated signals was recorded by 1 H NMR after photocatalytic runs (Fig. S8, S11 and S12).

The presence of atmospheric oxygen is detrimental to the reductive dehalogenation and no conversion under an ambient atmosphere was detected ( Table 1 , entry 6). On the other hand, simple argon purging of the solution for 5 minutes is sufficient to reach 28% yield in 12 hours in THF, which only negligibly increases to 30% if a thorough freeze-pump-thaw degassing procedure is employed ( Table 1 , entries 7 & 8).

Irradiation wavelength strongly affects the obtained conversion. More energetic light provided higher yields consistently in all tested solvents and 450 nm irradiation was the energetic threshold at which the reaction proceeded at convenient rates. An increase of the photon energy by 0.27 eV ( i.e. , 410 nm) provided doubled yields at the same reaction times ( Table 1 , entries 8 and 10); however, this is due to the contribution of a non-catalyzed photochemical reaction (see also below). No conversion was detected when the reaction was irradiated with a 625 nm LED or when the reaction was performed without irradiation at all ( Table 1 , entries 11 and 13). An almost quantitative yield of acetophenone is obtained after two days of irradiation at 440-450 nm. Therefore, the solvent plays a significant role as the obtained yields significantly vary from one to another ( Table 1 , entries 7 and 12).

During bromoacetophenone reduction, electrons are provided by a sacrificial electron donor. Although solvents such as THF can be oxidized by TOT to regenerate initial TOTH , this process is more efficient when amines such as Et 3 N are added. The amount of added Et 3 N plays a role and highest yields are achieved when 4-8 equivalents vs. bromoacetophenone are added. Further increase of sacrificial electron donor concentration leads to a drop of catalytic activity, presumably due to the shift of acidobasic equilibria of different TOTH oxidation states ( Fig. 2 ).

The TOT catalyst loading was investigated ( Fig. 5 ). Interestingly, a sharp maximum of catalytic activity was observed with a concentration of 0.1 g L -1 (1-2% mol with respect to the substrate). Such an efficiency peak suggests that supramolecular aggregation of the catalyst in its redox states occurs, as also evidenced by AFM, DLS, etc. (see above). At 2.5 × 10 -4 mol L -1 level, the concentration of catalytically active species is the highest, while at higher catalyst loadings, large-scale aggregation prevails leading to a decrease of catalytic activity.

The well-known thioanisole photosulfoxidation to methyl(phenyl)sulfoxide was chosen as a benchmark reaction to test the oxidation capabilities of TOTH under red-light irradiation. TOTH (0.3 mg, 0.9 μmol, 1.1% mol vs. substrate) was solubilized in DMF (3 mL) in a 4 mL vial. Thioanisole (10 μL, 0.085 mmol) was added to the solution. The mixture was sonicated for 5 minutes and then purged with oxygen. The flask was closed and equipped with an oxygen filled balloon. The vial was stirred under irradiation for 1 day (under 440-450 nm) or 96 hours with 620-625 nm LEDs (3 W nominal power, photon flux 5.70 × 10 -8 E s -1 cm -3 ; emission profiles of LEDs used are displayed in the SI). Aliquots were taken during the reaction and analyzed by HPLC ( Fig. 6 ) and the structure of the product was confirmed by GCMS (Fig. S13). The reaction kinetics follow first-order kinetics with a rate constant of 4.4 × 10 -6 (±3 × 10 -7 ) mol L -1 s -1 and reach >90% yield in 96 hours. The quantum yield calculated for this reaction is Φ Ox = 0.001. The calculated turn-over number (TON, based on a yield of 90% in 96 h) is 10 839, leading to a turn-over frequency (TOF) equal to 112 h -1 , which is high, 26 demonstrating the efficiency and the robustness of TOTH in sulfoxidation. Interestingly, when the reaction is performed with atmospheric oxygen, only 51% yield is obtained (compared to over 90% in pure oxygen). Furthermore, if a higher photon energy irradiation is used (440-450 nm LEDs, 3 W nominal power, photon flux 6.50 × 10 -8 E s -1 cm -3 ), the photoredox catalysis is enhanced and reaches a quantitative yield within 12 hours.

Thioanisole can be oxidized following two different mechanisms: 23,27 (i) energy transfer via photosensitization of triplet oxygen and (ii) single electron transfer (SET) directly from thioanisole and subsequent formation of hydroperoxides. To identify the mechanism, the photosulfoxidation was repeated in the presence of a singlet oxygen quencher Co(acac) 3 . 28 The rate of the oxidation was not significantly influenced despite the large excess of the quencher (see Fig. S14 & S15), which confirms that the mechanism does not involve singlet oxygen and is proceeding solely through SET and the formation of the hydroperoxide anion. 29 LCMS analysis of the reaction mixture performed after the photosulfoxidation run showed the presence of a species with a mass corresponding to the adduct of TOT 2 H 2 with molecular oxygen O 2 (Fig. S16 & S17). However, the exact structure remains unelucidated. Using anthracene as the starting material, anthraquinone is obtained after 16 hours of irradiation at 620-625 nm (Fig. S18). Together with the solvent oxidation described above, these reactions show a broad scope of substrates that can be photocatalytically oxidized by TOTH .

TOTH disproportionation under irradiation shows that TOTH can both donate and accept an electron rather efficiently. While the oxidized species is active in photooxidation, e.g. photosulfoxidation, the reduced species can be involved in photoreduction. To test this hypothesis, reduction of a nitroaromatic compound was selected as the second benchmark reaction. The photoreduction of methyl 4-nitrobenzoate using green irradiation (520-525 nm, 3 W nominal power, photon flux 2.19 × 10 -8 E s -1 cm -3 ) was monitored. Reactants were dissolved in DMF ( TOTH : 0.3 mg, 0.9 μmol, 2% mol, methyl 4-nitrobenzoate: 10 mg, 0.055 mmol) in a 4 mL vial, which was then purged with argon, and then 8 eq. of triethylamine (Et 3 N) with respect to the nitro-substrate was added. Et 3 N fulfils the role of a sacrificial electron donor, 30 allowing TOTH to regenerate in the photocatalytic cycle. Also, the basicity of Et 3 N deprotonates TOTH ( Fig. 1 ) and further improves its solubility in DMF.

The photoreduction was monitored in real time by HPLC analysis of aliquots taken during the reaction ( Fig. 7 ). After seven days of irradiation, 32% yield of methyl 4-aminobenzoate was determined with the overall conversion of 48%, leading to a quantum yield of Φ Red = 0.008. The TON and TOF found for this reaction are respectively 2839 and 17 h -1 . Interestingly, several products of nitro group partial reduction were detected as well (Fig. S19), including the hydroxylamine, azo-, and azoxy-derivatives. Such species are known to form under nitro-group reduction by zinc and thus indicate that the reduction also proceeds via a sequence of SET. The 1 H NMR analysis performed on the mixture showed a new set of aliphatic signals assigned to the Et 2 NH developing, thus confirming the oxidative decomposition of the Et 3 N (Fig. S20). Both decomposition products, acetaldehyde and Et 2 NH, have been identified by GC-MS (Fig. S5).

Remarkably, when the mixture of TOTH and an aromatic nitro compound is irradiated, the characteristic blue color of the mixture disappears. However, the mixture evolves differently depending on the wavelength used: when 525-530 nm LEDs are used, the solution slowly turns green overtime. When the vial is irradiated with 620-625 nm LEDs, the solution switches to colorless within a few seconds. This is not observed with aliphatic nitro derivatives. Unlike the irreversible color change under green light, when the red irradiation is interrupted, the blue color partially and progressively recovers. UV-vis investigations showed that the kinetics of this phenomenon is dependent on the concentration and the electron-deficiency of the nitro derivatives (Fig. S21). Higher concentration and the presence of other electron-withdrawing groups consistently lead to faster and deeper decolorization, however, always followed by partial slow recovery of the blue color. This suggests rapid formation of a charge-transfer complex between the electron-poor nitroaromatics and the electron-rich TOTH - ˙ scaffold, which in turn favors relatively low yields and slow kinetics of the reduction due to the low concentration of free TOTH - ˙ and energetically disfavored electron transfer to such a charge-transfer complex.

The rich landscape of reduced TOTH species ( Fig. 4 ) offers possibilities to engage in even challenging reduction reactions. The 4-bromoacetophenone photocatalytic reductive dehalogenation S RN 1 to acetophenone is a deep-potential reaction (around -1.81 V vs. SCE), 31,32 which has been selected as the third benchmark reaction. Given the challenging potential, the reaction is very sensitive to reaction conditions (see above); these were optimized to TOTH (0.3 mg, 0.9 μmol, 2% mol vs. substrate), 4-bromoacetophenone (10 mg, 0.050 mmol) and Et 3 N (56 μL, 0.40 mmol, 8 eq. vs. substrate) dissolved in 3 mL DMF by sonication. The deep blue solution was deoxygenated via argon purging. Initial experiments with 410 nm LED light in THF showed significant contribution of the non-catalyzed 4-bromoacetophenone photoreduction (28% vs. 16% yield for catalyzed and non-catalyzed reactions, respectively). With 440-450 nm irradiation, the non-catalytic photoreduction of the substrate was not observed and hence this wavelength range was used for the kinetic studies (see the control experiment in Fig. S23). Under these conditions, HPLC analysis gave a yield of 91% of acetophenone after 96 hours of irradiation ( Fig. 8 ) and the structure of the product was also confirmed by NMR and MS (Fig. S5 and S8). The TON and TOF calculated for this reaction are respectively 5871 and 61 h -1 .

Monitoring the kinetics of the reduction showed intriguing behavior. While one would expect a (pseudo)first order-type of kinetics, the plot suggested a more complex pathway. After the initial fast yield growth, a minor (but fully reproducible) deceleration of the reaction rate is observed followed by another enhancement of the photoreduction kinetics. Such a kinetic curve suggests contribution of two different catalytically active species, which is consistent with the observed conversion of TOTH to TOT 2 H 2 and TOTH - ˙˙ . These species feature higher absorbance at 440-450 nm (Fig. S2), which makes either of them catalyze the reaction further at an increased rate. The apparent quantum yield calculated in this reaction is Φ = 0.005, but due to the complex evolution of absorbance during the course of the reaction, this value is associated with large uncertainty.

The catalytic activity of TOTH in both oxidative and reductive photoreactions can be summarized in the following scheme. Upon irradiation, TOTH disproportionation occurs. Under an air or oxygen rich atmosphere, TOT acts as an oxidation catalyst: a clear example is the photosulfoxidation of thioanisole by single electron transfer from the sulfur atom, while O 2 reoxidizes TOTH - ˙ regenerating the initial TOTH state. When the solution is deoxygenated and in the presence of a sacrificial electron donor (Et 3 N), TOT is rapidly converted to initial TOTH by the reaction with Et 3 N. Meanwhile, the TOTH - ˙ acts as a single-electron donor: either forming charge-transfer complexes with electron-deficient species ( e.g. , under 620-625 nm irradiation in the presence of nitroaromatics) or eventually engaging in photoreduction. Prolonged irradiation leads to formation of TOTH 2 - ˙˙ and TOTH - ˙ dimerization to TOT 2 H 2 . These species also exhibit catalytic activity; however, they only absorb light with wavelength <600 nm (Fig. S2) and act as efficient deep potential photoreductants ( Fig. 9 ). This is supported by the determined redox potentials: TOT (0.44 V) is close to Et 3 N (0.83 V) and O 2 (0.60 V), TOTH - ˙ (-1.64 V) overlaps with those of nitrobenzoate (-1.01 V and -1.83 V), and TOTH 2 - ˙˙ (-2.10 V) with bromoacetophenone (-1.92 V).

The photocatalytic experiments with individual substrates (thioanisole, nitrobenzoate, and bromoacetophenone) proceed at convenient rates when irradiated at different wavelengths and/or performed under different conditions. This inspired us to employ TOTH in a sequence of photoredox reactions performed in a “one-pot fashion” controlled by conditions changed during the photocatalytic run ( Fig. 10 ). In this respect, TOTH , thioanisole and 4-bromoacetophenone were loaded in a 4 mL vial (under optimized conditions described above), the vial was purged with oxygen, and 620-625 nm irradiation was applied. Over the period of 4 days, gradual formation of the corresponding sulfoxide was observed by HPLC up to ca. 80% yield, while bromoacetophenone remains intact in the solution. Then, the irradiation was stopped, Et 3 N was added, the vial was purged with argon and 440-450 nm irradiation was initiated. Due to the lack of oxygen as a reagent for the oxidation and the presence of a sacrificial electron donor, photocatalytic oxidation of the substrate by TOT is disabled. Instead, enhanced formation of TOTH - ˙ , TOT 2 H 2 and TOTH 2 - ˙˙ leads to reductive behavior of the TOTH photocatalyst. Therefore, over the period of two days, gradual and quantitative formation of acetophenone was achieved, while the sulfoxide yield remained intact ( Fig. 10 ). This concept can even be extended to a full “red-green-blue” sequence when nitrobenzoate is added to the mixture as well; however, the mixture of products in this case becomes difficult to separate and quantify by HPLC (Fig. S22, left), preventing us to provide clear kinetic curves.

It must be noted that the observed sequence of photoredox reactions performed under irradiation at different wavelengths does not violate Kasha's rule, as this rule only applies to the relaxation of higher excited states of single species. However, in our case, there are different redox states (and potentially also (de)protonation states) which are responsible for the observed photoredox processes. In fact, if 4-bromoacetophenone reduction is performed in high excess of Et 3 N while irradiated by 620-625 nm light, the product of reductive dehalogenation is observed in about seven days, which, however, is less convenient than shorter reaction times obtained with more energetic light. In conclusion, the selectivity consists in kinetic control, where the reaction processing is dependent on the conditions.

CONCLUSIONS
We report the first application of a triangulene derivative as a versatile photoredox catalyst. We demonstrate that not only TOTH can efficiently reduce substrates like 4-bromoacetophenone and methyl 4-nitrobenzoate, but it can also efficiently oxidize thioanisole by easily tuning the experimental conditions and switching the light to a different wavelength. The pluripotent photocatalysis is enabled by light-induced disproportionation of TOTH followed by a sequence of single-electron transfer steps, either with a sacrificial oxidant or electron donor. The relatively complex pathway yields active redox states of TOTH , such as diradical anions and even dimers, which also contribute to the observed photoredox processes. These findings are supported and consistent with the proposed mechanism. By matching the conditions to the optimum of a selected photoredox reaction, even sequences of photocatalytic reactions can be performed in a “one-pot” fashion up to a full “red-green-blue” complex system. Concerning the recyclability of the photocatalysts, the polyaromatic character of TOTH made the migration on a silica chromatography column impossible. If the catalyst cannot be recovered, it also makes it easier to be purified. This work opens new perspectives for triangulene derivatives and pushes forward the investigation of fully organic materials in intertwined reaction networks to photocatalytically construct complex organic molecules.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Killiann Heinz: TOTH synthesis and spectroscopic characterization, experiments and protocols for the 4-bromoacetophenone dehalogenation and thioanisole sulfoxidation, preliminary experiments for the nitro derivative reduction, electrochemistry and spectro electrochemistry, HPLC runs, AFM, and manuscript editing. Emma Dos Santos: methyl 4-nitrobenzoate experiments and HPLC runs. Valentino L. P. Guerra: support for spectroscopic characterization of TOTH, spectro-electrochemistry and AFM, assistance for various experiments, and provided expertise in spectroscopy and physical properties. Ján Tarábek: EPR experiments and spin density calculations. Josef Chudoba: MS experiments. Dan Trunov: DLS experiments and data treatment. Anatolij Sokolohorskyj: GPC experiment and data treatment. Leoš Valenta: provided the starting TOTH batch, support for the synthesis and contributed to the manuscript (editing + reviews). Paula L. Widmer: provided the TOTH batch, support for the synthesis and contributed to the manuscript (editing + reviews). Michal Juríček: provided the starting TOTH batch, support for the synthesis and contributed to the manuscript (editing + reviews). Petr Kovaříček: research coordination, supervision, fundings, checked data, contributed to the manuscript (editing + reviews), And provided expertise in photocatalysis and organic chemistry.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
There are no conflicts to declare.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the Czech Science Foundation Grant No. 22-11299M ‘Reaction networks at phase interfaces for dynamic self-assembly’. Additionally, the team was also supported by the internal grants from IGA UCT Prague (A2_FCHT_2024_007). M. J. gratefully acknowledges support from the Swiss National Science Foundation (SNSF; TMCG-2_213829 and PP00P2_198900).

DATA AVAILABILITY
The datasets have been deposited on Zenodo under DOI: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.20178662 and can be obtained from https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.20178662 .

Supplementary information (SI): include chromatograms, NMR spectra, MS, DLS and GPC data, EPR and spin density calculations. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d6cy00867d .

ASSOCIATED DATA
The datasets have been deposited on Zenodo under DOI: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.20178662 and can be obtained from https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.20178662 .

Supplementary information (SI): include chromatograms, NMR spectra, MS, DLS and GPC data, EPR and spin density calculations. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d6cy00867d .