WATER CAPTURE
One application of next-generation porous
solids that has grown dramatically in the past decade is the area
of atmospheric water capture. The high surface areas and tunable water-binding
isotherms that can be achieved by the design and functionalization
of MOFs and other porous solids has brought about renewed excitement
around the possibility of harvesting water from ambient air. The ability
to capture air, even from very arid climates, has important applications
ranging from humanitarian relief to military operations. Indeed, the
author initiated a program at the Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency (DARPA) entitled Atmospheric Water Extraction (AWE) to address
the materials chemistry and engineering challenges associated with
developing water capture devices, many of which have been motivated
by the power of next-generation porous materials to adsorb water.
Indeed, one of the articles in this collection was supported by the
AWE program, where Siepmann , Gagliardi ,
and Yaghi utilize linker extension to enhance the water
uptake properties of MOFs. Linker extension has been long used in
MOFs as a general strategy for achieving ever higher surface areas,
but in the design of materials for water capture there are additional
considerations. Specifically, there remains the challenge of increasing
water uptake capacity, while not disrupting the ability of the materials
to take up water at low relative humidities. The authors address this
problem by using a computationally driven ligand design that identifies
the right balance of hydrophobicity and hydrophilicity to maximize
both desired attributes ( 10.1021/acscentsci.3c00018 ). In another study that combines experimental and computational
investigations, Sauer , Gagliardi , and Yaghi describe an approach that allows for prediction and
tuning of water uptake properties in COFs (and MOFs). The authors
devise a ‘hydrophilicity index’ that can be related
to the ‘step’ in the water adsorption isotherms in these
materials ( 10.1021/acscentsci.4c01878 ). Using a different porous material, Zhang and Liu tune the water sorption behavior of HOFs ( 10.1021/acscentsci.5c01233 ). In their study, the authors employ a popular strategy from MOF
chemistry, the concept of ‘multivariate’ (MTV) materials,
where the mixing of distinct, but structurally compatible building
blocks is used to create a porous material with tunable functionality,
and hence tunable characteristics. In this case an ‘unfunctionalized’
[1,1′:4′,1″-terphenyl]-3,3″,5,5″-tetracarboxylic
acid (TPTCA) synthon is combined with an otherwise identical, but
amino-functionalized synthon to prepare mixed-synthon HOFs. These
materials, which could be referred to as ‘MTV-HOFs’
could be prepared with tunable levels of amino-groups that allowed
for tuning of water sorption characteristics, including the step in
the water adsorption isotherm. It is a testament to these porous materials
that a framework solid connected via hydrogen bonds can be sufficiently
robust to act as a medium for water capture.

CATALYSIS
The use of next-generation porous materials
as catalysis has been another active area of research ( 10.1021/acscentsci.2c01083 ). Early discussions on MOFs speculated on the ability to tune the
pores of these materials with programmable sizes, shapes, chirality,
and functionality. The ability to program pore hydrophobicity, hydrogen-bonding,
acidic or basic groups, and active metal centers frequently raised
the question of whether MOFs and other porous solids could exhibit
biomimetic catalysis. Indeed, many porous solids have exhibited exciting
catalytic activity, with biomimetic like behavior and beyond. Tang and Ma describe their enzyme-inspired catalysis
within the pores of a MOF that harnesses chiral Frustrated Lewis Pairs
(FLPs), a distinctively abiologic functional group for achieving catalysis
( 10.1021/acscentsci.3c00637 ). Motivated by the activity
of reductase enzymes, they prepare a MOF that can hydrogenate α,β-unsaturated
imines to produce chiral β-unsaturated amines in good yields
with high enantioselectivity and chemoselectivity. The ability to
tune the composition and reactivity of the secondary-building units
(SBUs), the inorganic building blocks of MOFs, is another opportunity
for introducing catalytic activity. In that vein, Liu and Huang compare Zr­(IV) and Hf­(IV) SBUs in otherwise
isostructural MOFs using experimental, spectroscopic, and computational
methods ( 10.1021/acscentsci.2c01140 ). Their studies show that the change from one metal to the other
can dial up or down Bro̷nsted vs Lewis acidity, which defines
the catalytic characteristics of the material. Beyond framework-derived
catalysis, next-generation porous solids have also been used to encapsulate
catalytic species, including enzymes. For example, Yuan , Zheng , and Cheng report on a micelle-controlled
synthesis of a MOF that can encapsulate a lipase, which then can perform
efficient, enantioselective catalysis on a drug precursor substrate
( 10.1021/acscentsci.3c01432 ).

Beyond MOFs, Wang and Ma describe the photocatalytic characteristics
of COFs ( 10.1021/acscentsci.5c01645 ). A number of COFs share common features, such as consisting of 2-dimensional,
hexagonal topologies comprised of rigid, aromatic building blocks.
As such, many possess broad absorption features, which can be harnessed
for photochemical applications, including photocatalysis. In this
study, the authors demonstrate that electronic conjugation can influence
the distribution of photoelectrons in the COF, while induction effects
can direct these reducing equivalents to specific sites. This allows
for tuning of the electron-hole separation and transport to
enhance photocatalytic activity. The authors demonstrate the application
of these COF photocatalysts in the reductive separation of uranium
ions from spiked ground- and seawater. Zhang also explores
COFs as photocatalysts for uranium extraction ( 10.1021/acscentsci.3c01195 ). In their example, the authors use an elegant synthetic strategy
to create a layered COF structure comprised of imine- and vinyl-linked
2-dimensional COF layers. The resulting ‘layer-blocked’
structure enhances the stability of the photocatalytic system.

In a related (but not explicitly catalytic) study, Zhao and Zhu examine electrochemical extraction of uranium
using porous aromatic framework (PAF, which might also be classified
as POPs) electrodes ( 10.1021/acscentsci.3c01291 ). POPs/PAFs constitute a less crystalline, less well ordered porous
solid when compared to MOFs and COFs, but nonetheless represent another
group of important, next-generation porous solids. Indeed, the investigation
of next-generation porous solids as conductive materials and in electrochemical
(and photoelectrochemical) applications is growing at a rapid pace,
as illustrated by the other reports in this Collection led by Unwin and Dinča ( 10.1021/acscentsci.2c00509 ), Chao and Zhao ( 10.1021/acscentsci.5c00365 ), and Hua and Zhao ( 10.1021/acscentsci.4c00416 ).

INFUSION OF COMPUTATION AND AI
As with so many disciplines
today, both within and without science, machine learning (ML) and
artificial intelligence (AI) are beginning to make their mark on the
future of porous solids. This Collection features several articles
that use these tools for the discovery, prediction,
and advancement of porous solids. In one study, Kim applies
a model for quantum computing to predict material characteristics
of MTV-MOFs ( 10.1021/acscentsci.5c00918 ). As mentioned above with respect to HOFs, MTV-MOFs are ‘solid
solutions’ that contain mixtures of building blocks (typically
mixtures of differentially functionalized organic building blocks)
within a single crystalline lattice. In this study, the authors optimize
MTV-MOF design using advanced computational methods, while acknowledging
the synthetic challenges with achieving such systems. This may be
an area where computation is still ahead of what synthesis can achieve,
presenting an exciting challenge for experimentalists in the field
to tackle. Also focusing on the power of quantum, Sriram , Medford , and Sholl focus on one of the
longstanding potential applications of porous solids, direct air capture
(DAC) of carbon dioxide (CO 2 ). These authors employ millions
of quantum chemistry calculations to support ML models for DAC by
MOFs ( 10.1021/acscentsci.3c01629 ). In their study, they create a data set with adsorption energies
for mixtures of CO 2 and H 2 O. Similarly, Rajendran and Woo also focus on computational
predictions for CO 2 capture, but in this case for flue
gas capture ( 10.1021/acscentsci.5c00777 ). Their simulations identified MOFs that could retain CO 2 even under high humidity conditions, where water is a problematic
competitive binder for CO 2 capture with these materials.

For your typical, noncomputational chemist, popular knowledge around
computing and AI are associated with ChatGPT, Claude, and similar
tools that are now widely available. The author suspects many of us
in the field use these new tools for image generation, accelerating literature searches, and other,
relatively simple tasks. However, it is becoming increasingly clear
that more rigorous implementation of these tools can lead to very
meaningful advancements, efficiencies, and contributions to research.
In a modern example of the AI era, Yaghi incorporates
ChatGPT into their experimental methods to identify conditions that
allow for the rapid, microwave-based synthesis of MOFs and COFs ( 10.1021/acscentsci.3c01087 ). Specifically, the authors use large language model-based assistants
in their chemistry workflow (which they designate as a ‘ChatGPT
Research Group’) to optimize microwave synthesis conditions,
for MOFs and COFs of interest for water capture (see above). It is
this kind of implementation of these emerging tools that could greatly
accelerate materials research. The author would argue that those who
fail to familiarize themselves with these tools may find themselves
falling behind a new, unexpected pace of research enabled by AI. However,
like any tool, proper use of AI is critical to obtaining useful and
accurate (i.e., ‘hallucination’ free) outcomes. With that in
mind, Wang and Yang , discuss the importance
of prompt engineering in the use of AI for porous solids research
( 10.1021/acscentsci.4c01935 ). Their Outlook highlights
the present knowledge gap for many chemists in how to best use AI
tools. The authors provide guidelines for prompt engineering with topical
examples on MOFs. The study highlights how many of us in the chemical
sciences must go ‘back to school’ so that we can use
these tools to maximal effect in our research and process of discovery.

In closing, we hope our readership enjoys this collection of articles
that celebrates the ‘Year of the Porous Material’, including
not just the Nobel-recognized MOFs, but also COFs, HOFs, PAFs, PIMs,
and the many other acronym-friendly materials that are on the rise.
The importance of new materials in addressing challenges in energy,
health, catalysis, and other applications elevates the potential impact
of these next-generation porous solids. We encourage the community
to submit their best, most innovative studies on porous solids to ACS Central Science to further expand the exciting repertoire
of such reports in the journal.

SECTION
Views expressed in this
editorial are those of the author and not necessarily the views of
the ACS.