ABSTRACT
Abstract Cross-coupling reactions are the most reliable techniques in organic synthesis for constructing various C-C and C-heteroatom bonds, enabling the formation of complex molecular scaffolds with significant chemical and physical properties and their diverse applications. More specifically, defunctionalized cross-coupling strategies have attracted significant research interest due to their inherent advantages, including a broader substrate scope, elimination of prior pre-functionalization steps, and improved product yields compared to traditional cross-coupling methods, which often suffer from several limitations. The limitations of traditional cross-coupling reactions have been addressed through the development of sustainable pathways such as metal-free, photocatalytic, microwave-assisted, and electrochemical methodologies, which have been well documented in the literature. Therefore, a comprehensive perspective review on recent advancements in the synthetic applications of various defunctionalized cross-coupling reactions is in high demand, as it would stimulate new ideas and fresh thinking among emerging researchers. Hence, in the present article, we have summarized the recent advancements in cross-coupling reactions, with particular emphasis on the latest electrochemical strategies developed and explored over the past decade, along with their future prospects. Specifically, we have discussed electrochemical defunctionalized cross-coupling strategies including decarboxylative, deaminative, decyanative, dehalogenative, deoxygenative, and decarbonylative coupling reactions, which represent more sustainable alternatives for the formation of C-C, C-N, C-O, and C-X bonds in the current synthetic landscape. Furthermore, brief mechanistic insights, representative examples, critical discussions, and future perspectives are provided. This article is expected to serve as a valuable resource for young researchers and scholars, fostering innovative ideas and opening new avenues in synthetic organic chemistry research.

This review highlights recent advances in electrochemical defunctionalized cross-coupling strategies, including decarboxylative, deaminative, decyanative, dehalogenative, deoxygenative, and decarbonylative coupling reactions.

INTRODUCTION
Traditional cross-coupling reactions have long been recognized as one of the most powerful tools in organic synthesis, where in one functional group is replaced by another. In majority cases, organic halides react with organic or organometallic nucleophiles to form a wide range of C-C and C-heteroatom bonds ( Fig. 1 ). First reported by Wurtz in 1855, this coupling reaction laid the foundation for the field of cross-coupling chemistry. Subsequently, pioneering palladium-catalyzed coupling methodologies were developed by Richard F. Heck, Ei-ichi Negishi, and Akira Suzuki, whose groundbreaking contributions were recognized with the Nobel Prize in Chemistry 2010. 1 In this context, the Ullmann and Kharasch coupling reactions, developed in 1901 and 1943 respectively, also played crucial roles in the formation of biaryl systems. Later, in 1966, the Ullmann coupling was further advanced through the development of the decarboxylative cross-coupling reaction, wherein aryl iodides and aryl carboxylic acids were employed as coupling partners. 2 Alkyne or alkene partners were first coupled with aryl iodides or aryldiazonium salts in the reactions introduced by Castro-Stephens (1963) 3 and Meerwein (1939), 4 respectively. The most pioneering cross-coupling reactions-Heck (1972), 5 Negishi (1976), 6 and Suzuki (1979) 7 subsequently revolutionized organic synthesis by enabling the coupling of aryl halides with alkenes, alkylboronic acids, or arylzinc halides. In these Nobel Prize-winning reactions, aryl halides typically serve as the primary substrates, which represents a major limitation in terms of substrate scope, waste generation and broader applicability. Consequently, researchers have been striving to develop cross-coupling methodologies that can accommodate a wide range of functional groups, enabling coupling to occur without the need for prior pre-functionalization. Therefore, in 2004, Gooben developed a new type of defunctionalized cross-coupling reaction, in which a ketone group acts as a coupling partner instead of alkyl halide. 8,9 Later it has been found that -CHO, -CN, -NH 2 , -COOR, -OR, -NO 2 , and -TT (Thianthrenium Salts) groups successfully participate in the cross-coupling reaction for C-C/C-X bond formation reaction in the presence of transition metal or transition-metal-free conditions. 10-14

Cross-coupling techniques are privileged in modern chemistry because they make it possible to precisely create bonds like C-C and C-heteroatoms. 15-17 One of the major aspects of widespread use of cross-coupling reactions in organic synthesis is their remarkable reliability and reproducibility compared to the other conventional procedures. 18 Especially, Suzuki-Miyaura, Heck cross coupling reactions exhibited extraordinary success in design and generation the anticipated molecular architectures. 19-21 The traditional cross-coupling reactions (Heck, Suzuki, Negishi, etc. ) possess several advantages as well as notable limitations. 22 Their key strengths include high selectivity, excellent functional-group tolerance, and broad substrate scope, making them powerful tools for C-C bond formation. However, these methods also suffer from certain drawbacks: they often require relatively high catalyst loadings, demand extensive reaction optimization, and depend on specific prefunctionalization of substrates typically in the form of halides to achieve the desired coupling products. Owing to their great effectiveness and adaptability, these methods has remained essential in materials science and pharmaceuticals. However, their widespread use is often constrained by issues like as high costs and susceptibility to circumstances, despite their transformative potential ( Fig. 2 ). The limitations of traditional prefunctionalized cross-coupling reactions have been overcome through the development of electrochemical strategies. In these methods, C-C bond formation can occur directly, irrespective of the functional group present, thereby eliminating the need for transition-metal catalysts.

The C-C and C-heteroatom cross-coupling reaction is one of the most promising techniques in organic synthesis for the construction of natural products framework. 23-26 For the past few decades, transition metal catalyzed cross-coupling reactions such as Suzuki, 27-33 Heck, 34-36 Negishi, 37-40 Sonogashira, 41-45 Stille 46-51 coupling reactions etc. have been ingeniously employed for design and execution of synthesis of numerous naturally occurring alkaloids, terpenoids, steroids molecules of potent pharmacological activities ( Fig. 3 ).

The phenylated alkaloid α-cyclopiazonic acid 4 obtained from Penicillium cyclopium act as a potential calcium ATP-ase inhibitor in sarcoendoplasmic reticulum. A seven steps complete synthesis of 4 has been designed by Shi et al. involving Pd-catalyzed Suzuki cross-coupling as one of the crucial steps to prepare intermediate 3 in 91% yields from 1 and 2 ( Scheme 1A(a) ). 52 The polyketide (-)-Hamigeran B 8 is an excellent anti-viral agents found in a sponge Hamigeratarangaensis . A formal total synthesis of (-)-hamigeran B 8 was achieved by Kuwata et al. in seventeen steps via Suzuki coupling of enantiopure ( R )-5 with 6 using PdCl 2 (dppf). DCM catalyst to give pure ( R )-7 in 68% ( Scheme 1A(b) ). 53 The lycorine type alkaloid (±)-lycorane 11 is a challenging molecule due to its complex structural features. Monaco et al. explored a short total synthesis of (±)-lycorane 11 in six steps via PdCl 2 (PPh 3 ) 2 catalyzed microwave assisted intra-molecular Heck coupling reaction of 9 using DMF solvent to afford 10 in 74% yields ( Scheme 1A(c) ) 54 Zeaenol 15 is resorcylic acid lactone having potent anti-cancer activity against human tumor cells. An efficient total synthesis of zeaenol 15 was carried out by Doda et al. in nine linear steps. The Pd(OAc) 2 catalyzed Heck coupling was intriguingly employed between triflate 12 and alkene 13 to give 14 in 88% over all yields ( Scheme 1A(d) ). 55 Natural alkaloid (+)-homoanatoxin-a 18 found in benthic and planktonic cyanobacteria is an extreme neurotoxin functioning as neuromuscular blocking agent. This molecule is very interesting and attracted considerable research due their unique structural features and bio-activity. A simple and systematic synthesis was described by Addante-Moya et al. via PdCl 2 (PPh 3 ) 2 /CuI catalyzed Sonogashira cross-coupling reaction 16 and propyne to form 17 in 75% yield ( Scheme 1A(e) ). 56 Speradine E is a cyclopiazoic acid-based indole alkaloid with highly oxygenated hexacyclic molecular framework found in Aspergillus oryzae . These indole-based alkaloids have potential inhibitors against tobacco mosaic virus and moderately cytotoxic toward numerous human cell lines. A unique complete synthesis of speradine E was designed by Nakhla et al. using Pd(PPh 3 ) 4 catalyzed Sonogashira cross-coupling strategy as one of the key steps to afford 21 in 72% yield with coupling between 19 and 20 ( Scheme 1A(f) ). 57

The cis -fused terpenoid Stachyflin 26 exhibits anti influenza property with unique chemical structure. Henceforth, the molecule grabbed the research interest of many chemists. The complete total synthesis this fascinating molecule has been done independently by Haut and Wildermuth's group. The synthesis via Pd-SPhos catalyzed Negishi cross-coupling reaction of isoindolinone 23 and dehydrodecaline derivatives 24 using dimethylacetamide as base in THF solvent to afford 56% of the intermediate 25. Then several steps successive reactions lead to formation of the target molecule 26 in 43% overall yield ( Scheme 1B(g) ). 58,59 (±)-Collinusin 30 is a lignin natural product having structural constituent of aryltetraline core which shows anti-tumor, fungicidal, antiviral and anti-HIV properties. 60

A Ni-catalyzed tandem cyclization-Negishi cross-coupling reactions of unactivated alkene have been intuitively employed to accomplish the complete synthesis of 30. The consecutive steps of cross-coupling reaction between orgnozinc reagent 27 and unactivated olefin 28 in presence NiBr 2 catalyst in NMP at 50 °C and, the Jones oxidation gave lactone intermediate 29 in 62% yields. Then LDA mediated cyclization finally afforded the desired 30 in 65% yield ( Scheme 1B(h) ). 61,62 The non-sesquiterpene lactone heliolactone 33 damages many crops by stimulation of germination process of root parasitic weeds. Studies showed that presence of phosphorous and nitrogen supplements in soil lowered the production of heliolactone and thereby cause less crops damages. 63 McElearn et al. has designed an enantio-selective route to synthesize heliolactone via a Pd 2 (dba) 3 catalyzed Stille cross-coupling of chiral iodide 31 and 32 in 49% overall yield ( Scheme 1B(i) ). 64

Antibacterial agent glabramycin B 38 found in fermentation broth of Neosartorya glabra has attracted the attention many organic chemists due to its structural diversity. Pd-catalyzed Stille cross-coupling was intuitively employed as one of the key steps in an enantioselective synthesis of glabramycin B. Starting with compound 34 over several reaction steps of cyclization, hydrogenation etc. led to formation of intermediate vinyltriflate 35.

On Stille cross-coupling of 35 and olefin 36 in the presence of Pd-PEPPSI-IPr catalyst resulted intermediate 37 and followed by six steps of ether deprotection, DMP oxidation etc. ultimately ended to the desired glabramycin B38 ( Scheme 1B(j) ). 65 In most natural product syntheses, a specific prefunctionalized group is required to enable cross-coupling, and the use of a metal catalyst is typically essential for constructing the desired molecular framework. In recent years, electrochemical cross-coupling strategies have overcome these limitations by employing single-electron transfer (SET) redox processes. These reactions proceed in the presence of an anode and cathode often in an undivided electrochemical cell-allowing efficient C-C bond formation without the need for transition-metal catalysts.

REVIEW OVERVIEW
This review outlines recent developments in the design and utilization of electrochemical strategies for constructing small-molecule scaffolds with defined applications, addressing the economic and safety challenges associated with conventional synthetic methods. Particular attention has been given to advances reported since 2016. Several reviews have been published on cross-coupling reactions proceeding via hydrogen evolution, as well as on transition-metal-catalyzed electrochemical C-C and C-heteroatom bond formations. However, the electrochemical cross-coupling reactions beyond traditional methods is yet to be reported. In 2018, Tang et al. highlighted green and sustainable electrochemical reactions for the synthesis of different substituted arene, carbocycles, and heterocyclic moieties. 66 Yuan et al. has enlighten in 2021 the electrochemical oxidative cross-coupling strategies with evolution of H 2 for the construction of carbon-carbon (C-C), C-heteroatom (C-X), and heteroatom-heteroatom (X-Y) bonds ( Fig. 4 ). 67 In the same year Ma et al. published a recent progress across different electrochemical reaction paradigms, with a particular focus on transition-metal-catalyzed paired electrolysis for the syntheses of various important molecular architectures. 68 A thorough survey was conducted on the Ni-catalyzed electrochemical reductive cross-coupling reactions for the formation of C-C bonds by Yi et al. in 2022. 69 In 2023 Zhong et al. presented an overview of emerging trends in electrocatalytic C-N coupling reactions using CO 2 in combination with inorganic nitrogen sources-dinitrogen (N 2 ), nitrate (NO 3 - ), nitrite (NO 2 - ), and ammonia (NH 3 ) as feedstocks, and outline the underlying reaction mechanisms as well as potential design principles for the development of advanced electrocatalysts. 70 Concurrently, Lui's research group provided a systematic overview of the most recent advances in electroreductive cross-electrophile coupling (eXEC) reactions achieved over the past decade focusing on the use of readily available electrophiles, encompassing aryl and alkyl organic (pseudo)halides as well as small molecules such as CO 2 , SO 2 , and D 2 O. 71 Recently, in 2024, Kathiravan et al. presented a comprehensive account of the latest advancements in electrochemical C-N bond formation on arene frameworks through metal-catalyzed (Cu, Co, Ni) C-H/N-H cross-coupling reactions, encompassing both directing-group-assisted and directing-group-free strategies. 72 Dapkekar et al. reported in 2025 a thorough overview of recent synthetic methodologies highlighting conceptual innovations and the current state of mechanistic insight, with a focus on C-C, C-X (hetero), and X-Y (hetero-hetero) bonds formation during the period from March 2023 to January 2025. 73 In a concurrent report, Kathiravan et al. emphasized the development of innovative catalytic systems and optimized reaction conditions that enhance efficiency, selectivity, and sustainability ( Fig. 4 ). 74 Notable advancements include new nickel-based catalysts, broadened substrate scopes, and mechanistic studies elucidating the synergistic benefits of electrochemical methodologies. Moreover, a substantial number of electrochemical cross-coupling reactions beyond traditional methodologies have been reported in recent years; however, a comprehensive and critical review of these transformations remains lacking in the field of electrochemical synthesis. This review summarizes recent advances in greener electrochemical strategies for the functionalization of heterocycles and carbocycles through decarboxylative, dehalogenative, deaminative, decyanative, deoxygenative, and miscellaneous cross-coupling processes, with special emphasis on progress in reactor design and electrode materials within a unified platform since 2016. This review is expected to stimulate new insights and inspire innovative approaches in future research.

SUMMARY AND DISCUSSION OF THE REVIEW
The whole content of this review highlight on electrochemical defunctionalized cross-coupling reactions have been divided in seven segments including decarboxylative (12 citations), deaminative (3 citations), dehalogenative (6 citations), decyanative (2 citations), deoxygenative (6 citations), decarbonylative (1 citation) and miscellaneous (7 citations) cross-coupling reactions for the construction of small molecular motifs ( Fig. 5 ). Among all other, decarboxylative cross-coupling reactions under electrochemical conditions are probably the most relied sustainable technique to generate the molecules of interest. In these cross-coupling reactions (+)C/Pt(-), (+)Pt/C(-), (+)Ni/Pt(-), (+)Mg/C(-), (+)Fe/Pt(-) etc. are mostly used as efficient electrode materials. This review provides an overview of electrochemical defunctionalisation strategies, with a specific focus on developments reported from 2016 onward.

DECARBOXYLATIVE CROSS-COUPLING
Among the most versatile functional groups, carboxylic acids containing substrates are vastly present in the nature and it has also been commercially available in large structural diversities at low cost or it can be readily synthesized by means of numerous well-recognized reactions. The cross-coupling reaction with this easily available carboxylic acid is highly attractive as useful molecules can effortlessly be obtained in the presence of transition metal/metal-free approach via the extrusion of CO 2 along with the generation C-C bond. Decarboxylative cross-coupling can occur via the formation of nucleophilic or radical or electrophilic synthetic equivalents of the aryl/alkyl unit with the proper pre-functionalization. In the presence of transition metal, nucleophilic/electrophilic substrates are produced or UV and visible light-induced, organocatalyst and peroxide promoted radical processes for decarboxylative alkylation for the C-C bonds formation ( Fig. 6 ). In 2016, Lui et al. 75 summarized advances in transition metal-free decarboxylative alkylation of carboxylic acids and their derivatives. In 2017, Patra et al. 76 highlighted significant advances in C-C bond formation reactions involving decarboxylation as a key step under transition metal catalysis. These two reviews provide an overview of the main reaction types and corresponding mechanisms, highlights key advantages and limitations, and focuses on UV- and visible-light-induced, organocatalyst-, and peroxide-promoted radical processes for C-C bond formation via decarboxylative alkylation. In the same year, Wei et al. 77 provided a comprehensive overview of the utility of decarboxylative C-H bond functionalization in the synthesis of diverse organic compounds, including styrenes, chalcones, biaryls, and heterocycles. This review covers recent advances in the decarboxylative functionalization of C(sp)-H, C(sp 2 )-H, and C(sp 3 )-H bonds, along with discussions of reaction scopes, limitations, practical applications, and overall synthetic potential. In 2019, Rahman et al. 78 presented a detailed review of reactions proceeding via radical and azomethine ylide pathways, with particular emphasis on their practical applications and mechanistic illustrations.

In spite the traditional decarboxylative cross-coupling reactions have been tremendously employed in constructing library of molecules with anticipated properties, these often limit the widespread application of these methods in respect of requirement of pre-functionalized carboxylic acids as substrate, reaction steps, lower atom economy and more energy consumption. Moreover, these approaches mostly relied on the influence reactive and expensive transition metal catalysts, oxidants, active electrophiles under sophisticated reaction conditions imposing the constraint in synthesizing array of molecular skeletons. Hence, electrochemical decarboxylative cross-coupling has been emerged as one of the most relied energy efficient and sustainable synthetic approaches. Furthermore, apart from construction of C-C and C-heteratom bonds in small molecules, synthesis of active drug candidates can be easily accomplished with readily accessible carboxylic acid counterpart via electro-catalysis under affordable reaction conditions. In 2024, Ye et al. 79 have demonstrated an efficient synthesis of different commonly administered drug analogues like linezolid (54%), ziprasidone (56%), cetrizine (51%) etc. via electrochemical methods using graphite and Ni electrodes in combination with DABCO base, LiClO 4 electrolyte at room temperature under inert atmosphere with 4 mA of constant electric supply moderate to high yields ( Fig. 7a ). Concurrently, Yu et al. 80 has explored a simple decarboxylative fluorination under electrolysis employing C and Pt electrodes with Na 2 HPO 4 base and Et 4 NBF 4 electrolyte to generate effective drug candidates such as ibuprofen (46%), flurbiprofen (68%), loxoprofen (25%), and zaltoprofen (40%) ( Fig. 7b ).

Direct use of commercial aliphatic carboxylic acids in decarboxylative cross coupling reaction to form C-C bonds via C(sp 2 )-C(sp 3 ) cross coupling reaction remained challenging owing to their lower reactivity and generation of decarboxylative by-products. Decarboxylative C(sp 2 )-C(sp 3 ) cross coupling employing commercial aliphatic carboxylic acids are of particular interest in parallel medical chemistry (PMC) due to their diversity of commercial C(sp 3 ) space. To enhance the reactivity of carboxylic acids in decarboxylative cross-coupling processes, redox active esters (RAEs) are commonly employed in the presence of transition-metal catalysis; however, by-product formation from in situ - generated species often proves detrimental to these transformations.

Recently, in 2025 Morvan et al. realised an automated purification-free electrochemical decarboxylative C(sp 2 )-C(sp 3 ) cross-coupling to synthesise a library of compounds using N -hydroxyphthalimide (NHPI) esters 40 of the corresponding carboxylic acids 39 ( Scheme 2 ). 81 They began the investigation by synthesising a series of NHPI esters 40 using solid-supported condensation reagents in very good to excellent yields. Without further purification the NHPI esters, these were directly subjected to decarboxylative cross-coupling with arylhalide under High-Throughput Experimentation (HTE)-electrolysis to afford as library of C(sp 2 )-C(sp 3 ) cross-coupled products 41 in good to excellent Liquid Chromatography Area Percent (LCAP) yields. Key electrochemical parameters were systematically optimized. Optimal performance was achieved in the presence of Mg anode and C cathode at 3 mA current (6 mA cm -2 ) and 2.8 F mol -1 , while higher currents led to electrode passivation and product decomposition, and extended electrolysis (up to 5.6 F mol -1 ) reduced yields. Reaction volumes of 0.4-0.7 mL were required to ensure adequate electrode immersion and efficient stirring. Aryl halide concentrations could be increased to 0.2 M, enabling larger-scale reactions. Using more than two equivalents of NHPI ester diminished reactivity. Ligand (2,2′-bipyridine) and nickel source NiCl 2 ·6H 2 O are found to be superior in the electrochemical decarboxylative cross-coupling of crude NHPI esters. After successfully applying the coupling reaction to carboxylic acids bearing base-sensitive functional groups, they sought to extend this methodology to PROTACs (proteolysis-targeting chimeras) containing base-sensitive glutarimide moieties. The inherent base sensitivity of the glutarimide unit often hampers cross-coupling reactions due to decomposition of either the starting materials or the products. To overcome this limitation, authors activated commercially available carboxylic acid-containing partial PROTACs as their corresponding NHPI esters and directly coupled them to protein-of-interest (POI) binders, enabling rapid evaluation of warhead-linker combinations. By employing a decarboxylative C(sp 2 )-C(sp 3 ) coupling strategy rather than the more traditional amidation approach, the pharmacokinetic and physicochemical properties of the resulting PROTACs can be favourably modulated. Notably, this represents the first example of a direct C(sp 2 )-C(sp 3 ) coupling performed on commercially available partial PROTACs. They initiated the investigation by screening commercially available solid-supported condensation reagents for the synthesis of NHPI ester 40′. Yields were determined by quantitative NMR after removal of the solid-supported reagent by simple filtration followed by solvent evaporation. Among the reagents evaluated, a silica-supported carbodiimide proved optimal, delivering the desired NHPI ester in high yield and purity and thereby eliminating the need for chromatographic purification. Solvent and base additives were subsequently screened in parallel using high-throughput experimentation (HTE). Notably, the use of THF in the absence of any added base afforded the highest yield of 40′ (75%, 85% NMR purity). In the electrochemical setup, graphite rods served as an effective substitute for reticulated vitreous carbon (RVC) electrodes when used in combination with 0.5 equivalent of AgNO 3 . Among the solvents examined for the coupling reaction, DMF provided the highest yield.

Authors have developed a purification-free protocol for the activation of carboxylic acids as N -hydroxyphthalimide (NHPI) esters, which are subsequently employed in electrochemical decarboxylative cross-coupling reactions in a high-throughput, automated format. This workflow enables rapid access to diverse compound libraries, including PROTACs. However, in the reported study, productive coupling was observed exclusively with aryl coupling partners, while aliphatic and heteroaryl coupling partners did not show successful conversion and were not represented in the manuscript.

Catalytic decarboxylation is a powerful strategy for constructing C-C bonds. Compared with the previously favored malonate hemisulfides (MAHTs), β-ketoacids have received relatively little attention as 1,3-dicarbonyl precursors for catalytic decarboxylation. This can be attributed to their low melting points, intrinsic instability, susceptibility to decomposition, and tendency to undergo decarboxylation to the corresponding ketones under thermal, acidic, or basic conditions. Although existing studies have largely focused on small-molecule organocatalysis and metal-catalyzed approaches, reports on atom-economical and environmentally benign syntheses remain limited. Consequently, the application of organic electrochemistry offers a promising and necessary avenue for the sustainable transformation of β-ketoacids into value-added compounds. A highly efficient sustainable electrochemical decarboxylative cross coupling of β-ketoacids 43 with phenol derivative 42 for the synthesis of aryl ketones 44 has been illustrated by Wang et al. with the help of unseparated cells at room temperature devoid of addition of any catalysts and oxidants ( Scheme 3 ). 82 This direct electro-oxidation process have manifold advantages over the traditional methods including transition metal free conditions, no use of auxiliary electrolytes, no oxidising agent, electricity as sole oxidant. The user-friendly undivided cells setup in the context of sustainable development achieved the target molecular scaffolds with good to excellent efficiency. Authors initiated the reaction with trimethylphenol 42a and β-phenylketo acid 43a as model substrates under the electrochemical condition to test the efficiency and optimal sets of reaction conditions. Interestingly reaction of trimethylphenol 42a and β-phenylketo acid 43a in an undivided cell in a mixture of CH 3 CN and H 2 O with Na 2 CO 3 as an additive with 3 mA constant current at room temperature successfully delivered 78% of the desired arylated carbonyl compounds 44a. The most efficient yield of substituted phenol compounds was obtained by screening several parameters for this decarboxylative cross coupling reaction. Among all other organic and inorganic bases, Na 2 CO 3 along with mixture of acetonitrile: water (3 : 1) were borne out to be most effective sets to provide the maximum final products equipped with platinum sheets as cathode and graphite anode. In the controlled experiment they showed the necessity of the continuous current flow for the fruitful generation the desired products. This protocol revealed the general applicability to synthesize a wide range of substituted ketones with very good to excellent isolated yields. Various substituted p -methylphenols with both electron deficient and electron rich functional groups productively provided the anticipated products. They have shown that various aromatic phenols efficiently provided the corresponding ketones whereas p -cresol or 2,4-xylenol were unsuccessful in these transformations. Also, one the most notable observation is the phenol substrates with p-substituents other than methyl was unsuccessful in this reaction. The β-keto acids with electron donating substituents at the para -position of the phenyl ring exhibited noticeable efficiency in yielding the desired compounds. Advantageously, authors explored this protocol for coherent synthesis of hetero-aryl substituted end with satisfactory yields (44f). They had conducted controlled experiments to provide a deep insight of the reaction mechanism. The two-step single electron transfer electrochemical anodic oxidation of trimethylphenol 42a generates the key intermediate p -quinone compound 42ad from 42ac by the influence of base. Next base promoted decarboxylative enolization of 43a lead to the formation of 43aa. The addition of this enol 43aa to 42ad provided the final compound 44a ( Scheme 3 ).

Though they represented an excellent method of decarboxylative alkylation of β-keto acids, the study mainly focused on electron rich phenol as well as β-keto acids. The fate of electron deficient phenol with β-keto acids has not been included. Moreover, reactivity of cyanoactic acid or monomethyl malonate have not been included in this study which may lead to new findings substituted aromatic phenol derivatives.

The quinazolinone framework represents a privileged structural motif found in a wide array of synthetic intermediates, natural alkaloids, and biologically active pharmaceuticals, including methaqualone, luotonin A, rutaecarpine, and tryptanthrin. As a result, extensive effort has been devoted to developing efficient synthetic approaches to these compounds. Among the known strategies, the most frequently employed involves the annulation of readily accessible 2-aminobenzamides with aldehydes 83-86 or aldehyde surrogates, such as alcohols, 87-90 methyl arenes, 91 amines, 92-94 alkynes, or carbon monoxide with aryl bromides, 95 which can generate aldehyde-like reactive intermediates in situ . 96-99 Despite their success, these methods often exhibit notable drawbacks, including reliance on stoichiometric or excess oxidants such as TBHP, H 2 O 2 , K 2 S 2 O 8 , or DDQ-particularly when sensitive aldehydes are present; the need for (noble) transition-metal catalysts that may leave undesirable metal residues; high reaction temperatures; and the use of large quantities of bases or other additives that contribute to waste. Consequently, the development of more atom-economic and environmentally benign synthetic strategies employing greener reagents remains an important objective in this field. Recently, Wu et al. in 2024 has explored an environmentally benign electrochemical approach for the efficient synthesis of quinzolinones 47 as well as quinazolines 49 ( Scheme 4A ). 100 They have shown that α-oxocarboxylic acids 45 to be one of the powerful substrates in electrochemical decarboxylative cross-coupling reaction for easy access to quinazolines 49 and quinazolinones 47. Authors commenced the electrochemical decarboxylative process with glyoxylic acid 45 and (2-aminophenyl)(phenyl)methanone 48 as model substrates to figure out a standard set of reaction conditions for best outcome of this strategy ( Scheme 4A ). Surprisingly, they isolated 94% of the desired quinazoline 49a while conducting the reaction in an undivided cell equipped with C rod as anode and Ni as cathode with 12 mA of continuous current flow for 3 h. During optimization study DMSO was examined as the best solvent. And NH 4 I was found to be the best choice of reagent functioning as both N-source and electrolyte to provide efficient conversion under electrolytic cross-coupling condition. The yields of the desired product are not significantly affected either by increases in current flow or reaction temperature. Influence of the solvent showed notable impact as changing the solvent from DMSO to DMF or CH 3 CN lowered the product yields to 35% and 11% only. After having optimized sets of reactions, they have established the general applicability and scope of the developed strategy by generating series of diverse quinazoline skeletons with excellent isolated yields. Electron rich as well as electron deficient functionalities (such as -Me, -Cl, -OMe etc .) in the phenyl ring of both -R 1 and -R 2 substituents of 46 were well tolerated under this reaction condition to provide up to 94% of quinazolines 49. Electronically diverse substituted α-oxocarboxylic acids were satisfactorily resulted expected quinazolines derivatives in good to excellent yields. Interestingly, authors also successfully achieved the synthesis of quinazolinones 47 with these same tactics while reacting glycolic acid 45 with 2-aminobenzamide 46. Benzamide with methyl, butyl, cyclopropyl, cyclohexyl, allyl and benzyl group as N -alkyl substituents were well tolerated the process to provide up to 96% of anticipated quinazolinnes 47. Both electron withdrawing as well as electron donating functionalities in α-oxocarboxylic acids efficiently delivered quinazolinones 47.

Advantageously, authors have good scalability of the protocol by producing 1.73 gm of quinazoline 49′ with the identical reaction condition. On the basis of thorough controlled experiments, reaction was suggested to follow either of the two proposed mechanism. In the first proposed pathway, anodic oxidation of iodide ion generates I 2 which reacts with α-keto carboxylates 45aa to form hypoiodite 45ab and followed by decarboxylation to form acyl radical 45ac.On the other hand subsequent reaction of I 2 and 48a produce N -centered radical 48aa. The combination of 45ac and 48aa provide intermediate 48ab. Finally, intermediate 48ab react with NH 4 I to give desired quinazoline 49. In the second pathway, decarboxylation of α-keto carboxylic acids 45 generates aldehyde 45a which then produce imine 45b with benzamide 46. Subsequent nucleophilic addition of NH 3 , (cathodic reduction product of NH 4 + ), yields intermediate 45c which finally deliver the target molecules quinzolinone 49 via tandem condensation oxidation reaction processes.

Authors have reported the decarboxylative cross-coupling of only aromatic animo-cabonyl and amides for the syntheses of quinazolines and quinazolinoes under electrochemical synthesis, but the reaction of (2-aminoheteroaryl)(phenyl)methanones have not been explained. The study of reaction on glyoxalic acid with their aromatic analogue but remained silent on the aliphatic glyoxalic acid which may lead to more interesting results.

In another report, Tian et al. explored an environmentally benign electrochemical protocol for the synthesis of quinazolin-4(3 H )-one derivatives from readily available α-keto acids and 2-aminobenzamides ( Scheme 4B ). 101 Authors commenced the electrochemical protocol by examining the reaction between 2-aminobenzamides 50 and 2-oxo-2-phenylacetic acid 51. The electrochemical transformations were carried out in an undivided cell equipped with a platinum (Pt) acting as both anode and cathode. Following extensive optimization, the desired product 52a was obtained in 90% isolated yield with 5 mA constant current electrolysis in 2,2,2-trifluoroethanol (TFE) as solvent, using Bu 4 NPF 6 as the supporting electrolyte [Bu 4 NPF 6 /TFE (0.1 M, 2.0 mL)], at room temperature for 4 hours of reaction. Alternation of electrolytes with different ammonium salts and electrodes drastically diminished the reaction yields. Substituting the phenyl rings of the α-keto acids with either electron-donating (methoxy) or electron-withdrawing (fluoro) groups had little influence on the reaction outcome. Furthemore, in all cases the decarboxylative cyclization proceeded efficiently, independent of whether the substituent was located at the para, meta, or ortho position. Notably, α-keto acids bearing heteroaryl or polyaromatic groups, such as thiophen-3-yl and naphthalen-2-yl, also participated smoothly in the reaction, delivering the corresponding products in good yields. Next, variations of the 2-aminobenzamide component were examined. Starting materials with different substitution patterns on the benzamide phenyl ring reacted well with 51. When a methyl group was present at the 4- or 5-position of the 2-aminobenzamide 50, the cyclized products 52 were obtained in good yields. As expected, halogen substituents were also well tolerated, affording the desired products in good to excellent yields. In contrast, the reaction efficiency dropped markedly when 2-amino-5-methoxybenzamide was used. Subsequently, 2-amino-N-substituted benzamides were evaluated. In general, these substrates furnished the desired products in moderate to excellent yields, regardless of whether the N -substituent was aromatic or aliphatic. Notably, 2-amino-N-methylbenzamide underwent nearly complete conversion to the cyclized product, whereas its N -phenyl analogue exhibited significantly reduced reactivity, providing the corresponding product in much lower yield. The reaction mechanism was investigated through a series of control experiments. To examine the role of the applied current, several tests were conducted under the optimized reaction conditions. The results revealed that the conversion of 50 and 51 into 52 did not occur in the absence of an electrical current, highlighting its essential role in initiating the transformation. Based on the results of the control experiments, two plausible mechanisms for this electrochemical cyclization were proposed. In Pathway A, the reaction is initiated by condensation between the 2-aminobenzamide 50 and the α-keto acid 51, followed by deprotonation to furnish the carboxylate intermediate 50aa. This carboxylate species then adsorbs onto the anode surface and undergoes anodic oxidation, losing one electron to form the aroyloxy radical 50ab, which subsequently undergoes decarboxylation to generate intermediate 50ac. Intramolecular cyclization of 50ac constructs the six-membered ring, yielding intermediate 50ad. A final anodic oxidation coupled with deprotonation then furnishes the desired product 52. Concurrently, protons consumed at the cathode lead to the evolution of H 2 .

Though authors have represented an efficient electrochemical approach to quinazolinoe via decarboxylative cyclization of α -keto acids under mild conditions but this study has been confined to only 2-aminobenzamide. Apart from that fate of heterocyclic aminobenzamide has not been explored and reaction of aminoarylamine may lead to interesting results which may inspire new research direction.

Traditional eliminative synthesis of alkene from alkyl halides, alcohols are well known and often suffers from lower products yields, drastic reaction conditions, and engagement of large excess of reagents and oxidants. 102,103 Apart from that, the majority of these reported methods frequently resulted in hazardous chemical wastes that accumulated and caused environmental hazards as well as health crises for people. Hence, development of energy efficient and environmentally benign approaches are very challenging and in high demand. In this context, Yu et al. have explored a very simple and easy access to diversified alkenes 54 via green electrochemical decarboxylative elimination of carboxylic acids 53 under affordable reaction conditions ( Scheme 5 ). 104 They have chosen the methyl substituted ibuprofen 53a as the model substrate for initial trial of decarboxylative reaction under electrolysis. After testing various reaction parameters, they showed that t BuNOAc as electrolyte in CH 3 CN in an undivided electrochemical cell equipped with carbon cathode and anode and a constant 2.5 Volts current flow at room temperature in air delivered the best effective yields of the desired products 54. With this optimal set of reaction conditions then general scope and practicality has been established by synthesizing a wide range of substituted alkenes from their corresponding acid substrate with excellent efficiency. Various electron rich groups in aryl ring of carboxylic acids survived well the reaction. On the other hand, electron-deficient substituents ( e.g. -Br) showed better reactivity under electrochemical decarboxylation conditions. Different N - and O - containing cycloalkenes have been successfully constructed in this electrochemical reaction. Most fascinating aspect of this protocol is the successful conversion of bioactive and commonly administered drug candidates to their respective alkenes in excellent yields showcasing promising synthetic applicability of this strategy. Moreover, very well scalability of this synthetic method has been demonstrated via producing gram scale desired product 54b in 56% yield compared to small scale reaction (71% yield).

For detailed mechanistic insight of the electrochemical process authors have conducted several additional experiments ( e.g. Cyclic Voltammetry study) and control studies. On the basis of these experiments and previous literature, a reaction mechanism has been proposed to proceed via de-protonation of acid 53a by acetate to form carboxylate ion 53aa which on electro-oxidation generates the radical intermediate 53ab. Decarboxylation of 53ab results the formation of C-centered radical 53ac. Then successive oxidation and elimination of H + lead to the formation of the desired alkene 54a.

Author explored the aryl-carboxylic acids successfully in this electrochemical decarboxylative elimination, but effectiveness of alkyl-carboxylic acids in this transformation remained undisclosed which may instigate new research.

Indole scaffold being prevalent in many bioactive molecules of promising medicinal values. A highly efficient convergent paired electrolytic decarboxylative cross-coupling of indole-3-acetic acid and aryl bromide to generate arylated indoles has been explored by Wang et al. via Nickel catalysis ( Scheme 6 ). 105 The initial study was performed with 1-methyl-3-indole-acetic acid 55a and methyl 4-bromobenzoate 56a as model substrate under the action of NiBr 2 -glyme (10 mol%), 4,4′-di- tert -butyl-2,2′-bipyridine (dtbpy, 20 mol%), K 2 CO 3 (2 equiv.), and n Bu 4 NClO 4 (1 equiv.) in DMF at room temperature for 8 h with 4.0 mA of current intensity. Astonishingly, this model study offers the successful conversion to the desired arylated indole 57 in 18% yields which promoted the author further delve into and explore the reaction. During screening of the various reaction parameters, authors figured out 1 equivalent of DBU as the best effective base, and [lutH]ClO 4 as most efficient electrolyte in DMF as solvent at room temperature to offer the maximum production of the desired products. While checking the current intensity and effect of electrode materials, they observed that a continuous flow of 4.0 mA of current for 12 h with combination of Pt as the anode and Ni foam as the cathode offered the maximum amount of product formation. Moreover, alteration of 4,4′-dimethoxy-2,2′-bipyridine [d(OMe)bpy] instead of 4,4′-di- tert -butyl-2,2′-bipyridine (dtbpy) induced a remarkable increment of product generation. After that the investigator, established the general applicability of the synthetic strategy by exploration well tolerance of the electron rich as well as electron deficient functionalities in both the coupling partners. The groups including aryl, alkyl, amide, cyano, ester, and trifluromethyl were well tolerated in the protocol to provide satisfactory yields (up to 86%) of desired products. The aryl bromide bearing trifluoromethylthiol, trifluoromethoxy, methylthiol proceeded well in this reaction affording good to moderate yields of the corresponding products. Fused aromatic ring like benzocyclobutene (57b; 71%) as well as hetero-aromatic ring (57f; 85%) showed well compatibility to afford the desired vinylated product in good yields. Through rigorous controlled experiments authors has proposed the reaction mechanism following the oxidative addition of in situ generated Ni( i )-catalyst to aryl bromide to form 56aa [ArNi( iii )Br], which further reduced to [ArNi( ii )Br]. On the other hand, anodic oxidative decarboxylation lead to the formation of radical species 55aa which was captured by [ArNi( ii )Br] to generate intermediate 56ab [ArNi( iii )R]. Finally, reductive elimination afforded the desired product 57 and regenerated Ni( i ) catalyst.

Authors explored an efficient approach to electrochemical decarboxylative cross-coupling of indole-3-acetic acids but the study has been remained confined to indole-3-acetic acids, fate of other phenyl-acetic acids and/or heterocyclic acids ( e.g. pyrole and thiophene substituted) have not been included that may provide interesting results.

The practical synthetic strategy for decarboxylative cross-coupling engaging new electrophile other than simple carboxylic acids are very challenging and more attracting owing to substrate diversity and scope of the reaction. A unified strategy via synergistic influence of electro-catalysis and transition metal catalysis was successfully employed by Kong et al. in 2022 for the synthesis of array of functionalities including aryl ketones, amines, esters, and aldehydes. 106 Authors cleverly explored α-oxocarboxylic acids and their derivatives 59 as a new electrophilic partner in decarboxylative cross-coupling with arylated quaternary ammonium salts 58 under the integrated application of electro-catalysis and Ni-catalysis for good to moderate synthesis of corresponding products 57 ( Scheme 7 ). They have elegantly designed and accomplished synthesis of the targeted molecules up to 86% isolated yields under affordable reaction conditions. The authors initiated the reaction with phenyl trimethylammonium triflate 58a and 2-oxo-2-phenylacetic acid 59a as prototypical substrates and got 82% of the desired products 60a under combined electro-Ni catalysis. During testing efficiency of different reaction parameters, NiBr 2 (10 mol%) along with Bphen (12 mol%) were come out to be best choice of transition metal catalytic system merging with 12 mA of current with graphite and Ni-foam electrodes. The mixture of solvents system plays a vital role in fruitful conversion to the desired products and the 1 : 4 mixture of CH 3 CN and DMF was the most yielding solvents. With the standard reaction conditions scope and general applicability of this protocol has been established by generating wide variety of ketones, esters, amides, and aldehydes. Electronically diverse substituted both coupling partners afforded the anticipated products in moderate to good yields. Arylammonium triflate bearing methyl, methoxy, trifluoromethyl etc. at para-position provided good yields of desired products 60 up to 86% yields. While the p -nitro group generated comparatively lower yields. The α-oxocarboxylic acids with electron rich as well as electron deficient substituents smoothly coupled under the reaction provided very goods amounts of the corresponding products. Additionally, N,N -di-substituted oxamic acids were well coupled in the reaction leading to the amide products in satisfactory yields.

To get deep insight the reaction mechanism authors have conducted radical scavenging-controlled experiment to ensure the involvement of radical adduct formation. Additionally, the Cyclic Voltametric (CV) analysis revealed the initial anodic oxidation of α-oxocarboxylic acid 56a leading to the formation of acyl radical 59ac after decarboxylation via the formation of 56ab. On the other hand, simultaneous cathodic reduction Ni( ii ) resulted Ni(0) which undergoes an oxidative addition to ammonium triflate 58a generating 58aa. This Ni( ii ) complex 58aa then traps the acyl radical 59ac forming N( iii ) species 58ab. Final reductive elimination provided the desired product 60a with the removal of [Ni( i )-OTf] which regenerate the Ni(0) catalyst after cathodic reduction.

Authors have explored an efficient way of synthesis of arylketone via electrochemical decarboxylative cross-coupling, but this study is restricted to indolyl based carboxylic acids. Effect of other simple carboxylic acids has not been included in this study which may lead promising findings.

Esters and alkyl boronic acid are crucial scaffolds in chemical synthesis and medicine. Alkyl boronic acid and esters in particular are very useful for creating scaffolds rich in C(sp 3 ) through cross-coupling reactions. Traditional techniques for creating alkyl boron compounds, such as hydroboration of alkenes, 107-109 borylation of organometallic nucleophiles, 110 transition-metal catalysis for the borylation of alkyl halides, 111-116 photo-induced catalysis, 117-123 and decarboxylative borylation of RAEs, 124-126 have shown extensive use. However, these techniques often showed limited functional group tolerance and operational under harsh reaction conditions. In this regard, electro-organic synthesis serves as a potent and environmentally friendly method for oxidative and reductive reactions to construct new C-C bond involving single-electron transfer in mild circumstances with good functional group tolerance. Dai et al. investigated a mildly induced electrochemically promoted decarboxylative borylation process in an undivided cell without the usage of transition metal- or photo-catalysts ( Scheme 8 ). 127 The investigation began with the electrochemical decarboxylative borylation of N -(cyclohexanecarbonyl)phthalimide 61d′ with B 2 cat 2 62 under constant-current electrolysis (CCE). Using a 10-mA current in an undivided cell, followed by treatment with pinacol and Et 3 N, the desired product 63 was obtained in up to 80% yield (76% isolated). Other supporting electrolytes including n Bu 4 NPF 6 , LiClO 4 , and NaBF 4 provided slightly lower yields, and deviations from the 10-mA current also decreased efficiency. The reaction was sensitive to air, and alternative cathode materials such as RVC, Ni, Cu, and Fe did not improve the yield. A graphite anode performed worse than a platinum anode. The choice of solvent proved critical: THF gave reduced yields, while MeCN, DMSO, and NMP were all inferior to DMF. The decarboxylative borylation also proceeded effectively at the cathode in a divided cell. Although light from a fume-hood white bulb could promote the reaction, the rate was significantly lower. Control experiments further showed that the reaction proceeded similarly in the dark but gave only a very low yield in the absence of electric current, underscoring the essential role of electrolysis in enabling this transformation. Primary N -hydroxyphthalimide esters bearing either electron-donating or electron-withdrawing substituents were uniformly transformed into the corresponding alkylboronates in moderate to good yields under the established reaction conditions. Importantly, fluoro, chloro, and bromo substituted substrates were well tolerated, thereby underscoring the orthogonal reactivity of this electrochemical protocol relative to conventional transition-metal-catalyzed halide borylations and providing strategic handles for subsequent derivatization via cross-coupling methodologies. Both acyclic and cyclic alkyl N -hydroxyphthalimide esters proved suitable substrates for the decarboxylative borylation, affording the corresponding secondary and tertiary alkylboronates in moderate to good yields. The substrate scope was further expanded through late-stage functionalization of amino acids and drug-derived molecules; notably, β-amino acids and γ-amino acids including γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA), gabapentin, and pregabalin-were successfully transformed into the corresponding boronic esters in moderate yields. The electrochemically promoted decarboxylative borylation was successfully scale-up on a 5.0 mmol scale, affording the corresponding boronic ester in 48% yield. A series of experiments were carried out to gain deeper mechanistic insight into the electrochemically promoted decarboxylative borylation reaction. On the basis of the experimental findings, together with precedents from the literature, mechanism was proposed via cathodic reduction of the alkyl N -hydroxyphthalimide ester to generate radical anion 61a, which undergoes rapid decarboxylation to form the corresponding alkyl radical 61aa. This radical subsequently reacts with B 2 cat 2 and DMF to produce intermediate 61ab. Cleavage of the B-B bond in 61ab affords intermediates 61ac and 61ad. Intermediate 61ac was then transformed into the final product 63 upon treatment with pinacol and triethylamine.

Though this method represented an efficient electrochemical decarboxylative borylation under affordable conditions, authors restricted the protocol with only naphthyl esters. Moreover, the methods resulted low efficiency with the aromatic heteroaryl substituted esters.

Natural products containing nitrogen atom plays a vital role in pharmaceuticals, agrochemical industries. Hence, construction of C-N bond is one of the most important transformations in organic chemistry. Many scientists globally developed various ways to form carbon and nitrogen bond employing transition metal with good yields of the desired products. But the generation of C-N bonds under the mild and affordable condition is very demanding and challenging as well. Carboxylic acids owing to their high stability, low cost, non-toxic nature, can be engaged as readily accessible and benign starting substrate in organic transformation for generation of C-N bond. The C(sp 3 )-N bond can be generated by decarboxylative oxidation of amino acids via the intermediacy of stabilized carbocation, without use of any expensive transition metal and external chemical oxidants. Shao et al. discovered a decarboxylative C(sp 3 )-N coupling processed by electrochemical oxidation of amino acid 64 through anodic oxidative decarboxylation of carboxylic acid to create stable carbocation which is then trapped by azole or amide 65 to generate N -alkylated product 66 via C-N coupling ( Scheme 9 ). 128 The initial reaction for the decarboxylative C-N bond coupling was carried out using Boc- l -proline (64a) as the carboxylic acid and benzimidazole (65a) as the nucleophile in 8 mL of MeCN solvent at 23 °C, under air for three hours in an undivided cell equipped with a graphite anode and a nickel cathode, with n Bu 4 NPF 6 as the electrolyte under constant current of 7 mA for 3 h. Shorter reaction time and altering supporting electrolyte or electrode reduces the product yields and importantly electricity was the crucial for the success of reaction. With the standard reaction conditions, they tested the efficiency and the scope of the reaction varying the carboxylic acids as well as N -based nucleophiles. Various easily accessible cyclic N -protected α-amino acids 64 including proline, azetidinecarboxylic acid, and also different six-membered α-amino acids were well tolerated under the reaction condition with benzimidazole (65a) providing the desired C-N coupled products 66 in good to excellent isolated yields. Moreover, acyclic amino acids like alanine, leucine, lysine, valine, phenylalanine etc. were reported to be successful substrates under electrochemical decarboxylation to afford the desired products in moderate to good yields. In addition, dipeptide derivative (Gly-Pro), tetrahydrofuroic acid, 4-methoxyphenylacetic acid, γ-lactam moiety, and 2,2-diphenylacetic acid were successful in this reaction to afford the corresponding products. On the other hand, N -based nucleophiles like pyrazole, benzotriazole, 1, 2, 3- and 1, 2, 4-triazole, and tetrazole were efficiently converted to the desired products. One very important advantage of this procedure reported was the scalability of this method to synthesize desired product 66a in 96% yield (1.37 g). Authors conducted different controlled experiments including cyclic voltammetry (CV), divided cell reactions etc. to reveal the reaction course. They concluded that the reaction proceeding through electrochemical de-carboxylative oxidation of α-amino acids though C-N coupling to afford the desired products 66.

Though this method described an efficient electrochemical decarboxylative cross-coupling, but authors limited their study to α-amino acids. Amide system is not disclosed in this study.

In organic synthesis, C(sp 3 )-C(sp 2 ) cross coupling is crucial and helpful for creating value-added compounds. Researchers have discovered novel methods to create C(sp 3 )-C(sp 2 ) bonds utilizing more prevalent, naturally occurring functional groups by employing highly sensitive and less reactive organometallic reagents. Among these more recent techniques are reductive couplings, which employ metals like zinc or manganese to aid in the transfer of electrons to the nickel catalyst. Electrochemical techniques have recently attracted keen interest as a viable and appealing way to address persistent issues in organic synthesis. In this regard, Li et al. investigated a nickel-catalyzed, electrochemically driven reductive cross-coupling reaction of N -hydroxyphthalimide esters and aryl halides by a decarboxylative C(sp 3 )-C(sp 2 ) bondforming transformation, producing a number of useful small compounds ( Scheme 10 ). 129 They started the study by coupling of NHP ester 67 with iodobenzene 68 utilizing reticulated vitreous carbon (RVC) as the cathode and anode material., Setting the maximum potential (V) and current (A) output at 10 V and 20 mA with triethylamine using as the sacrificial reductant which undergo anodic oxidation and donate electrons to complete electrochemical process. Different controlled experiments exhibited the necessity of combination of 30 mol% of Ni( ii )/dtbbpy catalytic system along with the constant electron current for successful reaction conversion to the desired products. Then they investigated the general scope and applicability of this electrochemical protocol to synthesise library of compounds with moderate to excellent isolated yields. A variety of primary and secondary NHP esters 67, including those originating from natural products were tolerated by the reaction. The NHP esters with constrained α-carboxyl quaternary sp 3 centres were successful under this reaction with good efficiency while non-constrained quaternary centres remained unsuccessful. A wide range of electron-deficient and electron-neutral (hetero)aryl halides were well tolerated under the reaction conditions. To get detailed insight of the reaction a radical clock experiment confirmed the involvement of radical intermediates. The rapid ring opening of the cyclopropylmethyl radical-arising from decarboxylative fragmentation of the corresponding carboxyl radical was consistent with the formation of corresponding compound obtained from the coupling of NHP ester with iodobenzene.

Though this method presented excellent method of electrochemical decarboxylative cross-coupling, but it necessitates the employment of aryl halides as one coupling partner. The alkyl/alkenyl/alkynyl halides may allow as coupling partners. Another important observation is the heteroaryl substituted NHP ester were proved to less efficient or even inefficient under the reaction conditions.

Sulfonylhydrazides are the readily available intermediate for the desired sulfonation through the sustainable approach via N-S bond cleavage as N 2 and water are the sole by products in the reaction. Moreover, electrochemical sulfonation with sulfonylhydrazides is of additional advantages over the traditional metal catalytic approaches in respect of sustainable chemical synthesis. A very simple and straightforward synthesis of stereo-selective ( E )-vinyl sulfones 72 has been accomplished by Zhao and co-workers via electrochemical decarboxylative sulfonation of cinnamic acid derivatives 70 following N-S bond cleavage of aromatic sulfonylhydrazides 71 ( Scheme 11 ). 130 They began investigation choosing p -toluenesulfonylhydrazide 71a and cinnamic acids 70a as model substrates reacting with K 2 CO 3 in a solution of 0.1 M n BuNBF 4 in DMSO in a one-compartment electrochemical cell with (1 × 1.5 cm 2 ) two Pt electrodes flowing 5 mA continuous current. Interestingly they got 38% of the desired vinylsulfone 72a while carrying out the reaction at room temperature for 10 h. Altering the base to t -BuOLi elevated the yield of the vinylsulfone to 76% and found to be the most effective one among others. DMSO revealed as the most efficient solvent in combination with electrolyte n Bu 4 NBF 4 for the electrochemical conversion which may be due to better solubility of electrolyte. While optimizing current intensity for this process, authors found that 5 mA continuous current with Pt electrodes offered the best results in this reaction. With the standard sets of reaction conditions, they then explored the practicality of this protocol by design and synthesis of a vast ranges of functionalized vinylsulfones with great efficiency. Electronically diverse cinnamic acids provided vinylsulfones up to 84% of isolated yields. During the study of the insightfull details of the reactions, radical scavenging experiment with TEMPO revealed the involvement of radical intermediate. And cyclic voltammetry (CV) experiment showed that the reaction is initiated by electrochemical oxidation of p -toluenesulfonylhydrazide 71a promoted by base t BuOLi. Deprotonation of p -toluenesulfonylhydrazide 71a by t BuOLi resulted anion 71aa which successively oxidised to 71ac in anode via 71ab. Then addition of 71ac to cinnamate 70aa afforded 71ad which readily decarboxylate to give the desired vinylsulfone 72a.

In this current report authors have described an efficient synthesis of vinylsulfones via electrochemical decarboxylative cross-coupling, but the study has been restricted to aromatic carboxylic acids. Fate of aliphatic carboxylic acids have not been disclosed; this may inculcate new direction in research.

Transition metal catalytic decarboxylative cross-coupling has long been a well-known tactic for the construction of C-C and C-heteroatom bonds in building a desired molecular architecture commonly prevalent in natural products and bioactive molecules. These transition metal catalytic processes are mostly rely on expensive metals, reagents, additives under harsh reaction conditions and often encounter limited substrate scope and lower yields of desired products. Furthermore, most of these syntheses ended up with release of toxic chemical wastes causing harmful impact to the environment as well as human health. Therefore, advent of new environmentally benign techniques is in high demand in the context of achieving sustainable developmental goals. In this regard, realisation of electrochemical synthesis to obtain the desired target is a real solution in the present scenario. In this regard, Huang et al. in 2016 have reported an electrochemical decarboxylative cross-coupling strategy for the synthesis of 2-substituted benzimidazoles 75 by the reaction between α-keto acids 73 and ortho -phenylenediamine 74. 131 They initially commenced their study with benzoylfumaric acid 73a and ortho -phenylenediamine 74a as model substrate under electrochemical process. In the process of searching the best suitable sets of reaction parameters, authors found NH 4 ClO 4 as the most effective electrolyte in a mixture of DMSO and H 2 O (3 : 1) as solvent producing 94% of the desired products 75. This protocol provided the most promising result while carrying out the reaction in an undivided cell with 5 mA of continuous current flow for a period 15 h at room temperature ( Scheme 12 ).

After getting the standard sets of reaction conditions, they have explored the scope and general applicability of this protocol by generating a large variety of benzimidazoles in moderate to excellent yields. A thorough examination showed that both electron rich and electron deficient substituents in the aromatic ring of the diamine were well tolerated in the electrochemical process providing good to excellent formation of corresponding 2-substituted benzimidazole derivatives 75. Advantageously, halide substituted diamines were smoothly underwent electrochemical process giving halide substituted benzimidazole which opens up a new avenue for further functionalization at halide position. Most importantly aliphatic, aromatic as well as hetero-aromatic α-keto acids performed well conversion. Fortunately, this reaction has also successfully generated benzathiazole in very good yields.

The controlled experiments and detailed investigation revealed that the reaction follows radical pathway. And based of various experimental results and previous literature, authors have proposed the reaction mechanism involving oxidative decarboxylation of α-keto carboxylate ion 73aa to form acyl radical 73ac via radical intermediate 73ab (Pathway I). Then the radical intermediate 73ac couples with partially protonated diamine 74aa to form cationic intermediate 74ab followed by deprotonation to 74ac. This intermediate 74ac finally undergoes condensation followed by anodic oxidation to give the desired benzimidazole. On the other hand, a condensation between partially protonated diamine 74aa and α -keto carboxylate ion 73aa to form hemiaminal intermediate 74ae (Pathway II). This intermediate 74ae on anodic oxidative decarboxylation followed by hydrogen atom absorption from ( i Pr) 2 NEt + ˙ to form intermediate 74ab. This finally provided the desired benzimidazole as pathway I.

Though the reaction provided good amount of substituted benzimidazole mediated by electrochemical decarboxylative cyclization pathway, authors didn't explore the reaction with hetero-aryl substituted α-keto acids and this may prompt more promising results leading to new resach in future.

DEAMINATIVE CROSS-COUPLING
Cross coupling transformations either transition metal promoted or metal free sustainable approaches to achieve the complex molecular architectures of great utility have remained central dogma of research in organic synthesis. 132-135 Most of these methods employed activated substrates with ready to functionalize groups under catalytic influence. Straightforward functionalization of an inactive group like NH 2 via cross-coupling strategy to construct new C-C or C-heteroatom bonds for building molecules of interest is highly challenging and admirable in the context of sustainable organic synthesis. Therefore deaminative cross-coupling reactions come in forefront of synthetic chemistry research domain as superior alternative to the conventional activation of an inactive group and functionalization thereafter. 136 For the last few decade enormous advancement have been made in defunctionalized cross coupling engaging transition metal catalysis with prerequisite substrate activation, use of expensive catalysts, additives, harsh reaction conditions often with limited substrate scopes and poor yields of anticipated molecules. 137 Moreover, these protocols often are not regarded as green and sustainable approaches as they fail to provide proficiency in the respect of energy consumption, waste generation, atom economy etc. Hence more robust, energy efficient, economic strategies are in high demand for sustainable development. Thus, organic synthesis via electrochemical influence has been the most trustworthy in recent years owing to their sustainability and procedural efficiency. Electrochemical deaminative cross-coupling to produce the diverse molecular scaffolds via the formation of C-C and/or C-heteroatom bonds are the most emerging trends in organic synthesis due to cost effective, eco-friendliness, broad substrate scope, and high yields of the anticipated products. In 2025, Lee's group published a comprehensive review on radical-mediated deaminative transformations involving C(sp 3 )-N bond cleavage, highlighting key mechanistic insights, substrate scope, and emerging applications in organic synthesis. 138 In parallel, Ma et al. surveyed visible-light-promoted deaminative cross-coupling reactions of Katritzky salts for C-C bond formation, critically assessing the scope, limitations, and practical applicability of the reported methodologies. 139 In their 2025 review, Sigh et al. outlined multiple approaches to photoinduced stereoselective deaminative alkylation, encompassing diverse bond constructions such as C(sp 3 )-C(sp), C(sp 3 )-C(sp 2 ), C(sp 3 )-C(sp 3 ), and C(sp 3 )-N ( Fig. 8 ). 140

Aryl carboxylic acids serve as the fundamental structural components of several organic materials, medicines, and natural products. Though numerous catalytic as well non-catalytic synthetic methods for carboxylic acids have been explored in literature. Currently, use of CO 2 as a desirable chemical feedstock for a variety of valued and synthetic products is continuously developing, leading to an autonomous contribution to carbon neutrality and reducing the need for petrochemical-based chemical manufacturing. An electrochemical deaminative carboxylation of aryltriazenes has been demonstrated for the first time by Zhao et al. by sustainably employing CO 2 as a green C1 building block which effectively transformed a wide variety of easily accessible aryltriazenes 76 into synthetically useful carboxylic acids 77 under mild, catalyst-free conditions ( Scheme 13 ). 141 They have explored viability of electrochemical carboxylation of aryltriazenes with CO 2 . They started investigation using ( E )-1-( p -tolyldiazenyl) pyrrolidine 76a as the model substrate to react with CO 2 (1 atm) in an undivided cell. Following a thorough analysis of the reaction conditions, they achieved a 64% yield of the carboxylation product (4-methylbenzoic acid 77a) with Mg plate serving as the sacrificial anode, Ag plate as the cathode, DMF as the solvent, and Bu 4 NBr as the electrolyte with a steady current of 10 mA for 4 h. Altering the electrode materials, solvents, and electrolyte have shown drastic impact on the reaction yield. Controlled tests revealed that CO 2 and constant current supply were necessary in order to attain a high efficiency in this direct carboxylation reaction. Then with optimized reaction conditions, the substrate scope of electroreductive carboxylation was examined. Gratifyingly, aryltriazenes with para -electron-donating as well as electron-withdrawing substituents including methoxyl, phenoxyl, benzyloxy, tert -butyl, methyl, ethyl, benzyl, fluoro, and chloro groups provided the corresponding carboxylic acid products up to 69% isolated yields under the optimized reaction conditions. Simple aryltriazenes containing either electron-rich or electron-deficient substituents at the ortho - and meta -positions were well tolerated and produced moderate to good yields of the corresponding carboxylic acids. Interestingly, diamine substrates were carboxylated by double deamidation to produce the dicarboxylic acid product dibenzoic acid, along with a monocarboxylic acid and hydrogenated compounds as by-products.

Advantageously, this innovative electrochemical deaminative carboxylation process was executed for gram scale, and under significantly altered circumstances, 0.416 g of 77a was obtained in 51% isolated yield. To get the deep insight into the reaction mechanism authors conducted several controlled experiments. And based on these experiments, the reaction was proposed to follow the initial formation of radical anion intermediate 76aa from aryltriazine 76 via single electron transfer (SET) reduction in cathode. Next, this intermediate 76aa undergoes a C-N bond cleavage to form aryl radical 76ab with elimination of N 2 and pyrrole anion. Subsequent SET reduction of intermediate 76ab generates nucleophilic aryl anion 76ac which then attack CO 2 to afford the carboxylate salt 76ad. Final acidification provided the desired carboxylic acids 77.

Although, author demonstrated an innovative electro-reductive carboxylation method yielding corresponding carboxylic acids in moderate to excellent isolated yields, but it is only limited to triazenes. The fate of simple alkyltriazenes and heteroaryl triazene like pyrrole, furan, pyridine etc. have not been explored in this study, which may lead to new area of research.

Aliphatic primary amines are privilege functionality, widely found in living organisms, and biologically active molecules. Alkyl radicals which could be obtained by the cleavage of C(sp 3 )-N bonds show great promise towards synthetic organic chemistry and drug discovery. However, because of strong C-N bond strength (C-N BDE = 102 kcal mol -1-1 ) and poor leaving aptitude of -NH 2 group, breaking the C-N bond in a primary amine (C-NH 2 ) is a significant issue. Eventually, many synthetic strategies using different amine activation methods such as (i) isonitrile activation, (ii) diazo activation, (iii) imine activation, (iv) pyridinium activation etc. have been reported in literature 142-144 to achieved different functionality through deamination reaction. Recently (2025), Shu et al. have developed an efficient, operationally simple electrochemical deaminative protocol for the construction of C-X bonds, which complements the diverse functionalization of alkylaminesin absence of any transition metal or photo-catalysts ( Scheme 14 ). 145 The methodology can be applied to a number of transformations, including borylation, sulfuration, selenation, sulfonation etc. The searching for the electrochemical deaminative functionalization was started with deaminative borylation reaction using alkyl bistriflimidate 78 and B 2 cat 2 80 as model substrates. The reaction was conducted employing in an undivided cell set-up with a magnesium anode and nickel foam cathode under constant current electrolysis (CCE), and they obtained desired alkyl boronate 81 in 80% yield. After initial screening, they optimized the reaction conditions for this transformation and the best result was obtained by reacting 0.3 mmol of 78, with 1.2 mmol of 80, 0.9 mmol TBAI as electrolyte, using DMA (3.0 mL) as solvent, under Ar atmosphere, at 25 °C under 20.0 mA constant-current flow for 30 min in an undivided cell. After optimization, they looked at the reaction's scope and generalised this electrochemical transformation. A wide range of functional group such as halides, ethers, trifuoromethyl, aromatics, esters, protected alcohols, cyanides, thioethers, and heterocyclic proved suitable in this protocol and produced borylation products in moderate to good yields. In addition, both the alkyl and aryl sulfides synthesized in high amount following standard reaction condition. The methodology also explored for the synthesis of deaminative selenation (81b), telluration (81c), and sulfonylation (81a) products in very good yields, creates a novel route for the synthesis of sulfur and other metal-containing biologically active compounds.

On the basis of prior research and some control experiments, the mechanism of the electrochemical deaminative reaction was established as depicted in Scheme 14 . Initially, alkyl bistriimidate 78 is quickly iodinated to start the process and produce alkyl iodide 78aa. In the meantime, complex 80aa is formed by DMA and one equivalent of B 2 cat 2 80, which then undergoes single electron reduction at the cathode to generate radical anion 80ab. This radical may then follow one of two possible pathways. In path-a, the alkyl radical 78ab reacts with 80aa to produce the alkyl boronate 82 product and 80ac/80ae. Alkyl iodide 78aa then oxidizes these products in anode to produce 80af and an alkyl radical 78ab. In path-b, through radical-radical cross coupling between 80ab and alkyl radical 78ab generates alkyl boronate 82 and complex 80ad.

Though authors conducted an excellent study for the alkyboronation under electrochemical pathway, the investigation soley confined on arene susbtuted alkyl bistriimidate. The examination of the protocol on aryl-bistriimidate may provide inspiring research finding which would lead to new dimension of electrochemical research.

Katritzky pyridium salts produced from primary amines have been used as carbon radical proxy for photoredox chemistry and transition-metal catalysis. Previously reported reductive cross-coupling reactions of Katritzky salts have typically required the use of expensive photocatalysts, 146 electron donor-acceptor (EDA) complexes, 147 or heavy metal catalysts 148,149 to promote the single-electron transfer (SET) process. The analogous single electron transfer (SET) reaction can be obtained by cathodic reduction without chemical catalyst loading. 150 In this regard recently, Liu and co-workers reported a mild and catalyst- and electrolyte-free electrochemical reductive deaminative cross-coupling protocol based on C-N bond activation of Katritzky salts derived from readily available primary amines, offering a cost-effective setup and broad substrate scope ( Scheme 15 ). 151 They start their electrochemical search by doing reductive cross-coupling reaction between pyridinium tetrafluoroborate 86 derived from cyclohexylamine and α-trifluoromethyl alkene 87. After a meticulous inquiry of reaction condition, the cross-coupling product 88 was obtained up to 85% isolated yield by employing nickel foam cathode and zinc as the sacrificial anode in an undivided cell using DMSO as solvent with a constant current flow of 5.0 mA for four hours at room temperature. The reaction was screen with a series of non-polar solvent such as DMF, DMA, MeCN etc. , but resulted in deceased yield. With the optimized reaction condition in hand, the versatility and substrate scope was tested. Under the optimal reaction condition, katrizky salts of cyclic primary amines preceded smoothly, yielded moderate to excellent cross-coupled products. Katrizky salts having cyclic ether, N-Boc protection affords the fluoroalkenylated products in good yields. Alkylamines that are linear or branched were also transformed into the desired products.

Different substituted α-trifluoromethyl alkenes were also tolerate and provided desired product in good yield. Trifluoromethylated alkenes having methoxy-phenyl groups afforded target products in good yields. Styrenes having electron-attracting such as -CF 3 (88i), ester (88j), and -CN etc. provided desired products up to 82% yield. Most importantly, this electrochemical reductive cross-coupling strategy was also applied in the late-stage modification of biologically important substrates. The corresponding difluoroalkene derivatives of fenbufen (88n), indomethacin (88o), and estrone (88p) were obtained in very good yields. The cross-coupling reaction was also ensued with alkyne or thiol/selenyl substituted derivatives under identical conditions to get 88d, 88h, 88l and 88m.

This protocol represented an excellent electrochemical fluoroalkenylation, alkynylation and thiolation method, but authors remained silent about the cross-coupling reaction with primary alkyl/aryl amines.

DEHALOGENATIVE CROSS-COUPLING
The de-halogenative cross-coupling processes frequently use a metal catalyst to replace a halogen atom on an organic molecule with a new incoming substituent, usually through a coupling reaction with another organic molecule. These cross-coupling reactions generates complex molecules from smaller building blocks via the formation of C-C and C-heteroatom bonds. These coupling reactions shows tremendous usefulness in organic synthesis for the construction of large number of molecules. 152-155 The major shortcomings of these reactions which decline the widespread application of these reactions are the use of expensive catalysts, harsh reaction conditions, and often poor yields of the desired products. This frequently results from unwanted dehalogenation, in which the halogen is removed without substitution, leading to the formation of a dehalogenated byproduct. Dehalogenation via electrochemical cross-coupling reactions is a potent and environmentally friendly method of chemical synthesis that could completely change how we build complex compounds. By employing an electrochemical technique to extract halogen atoms from organic molecules, which are subsequently coupled together, to create new C-C and C-heteroatom bonds. These reactions are gaining much attention as a sustainable alternative to the traditional synthetic methods, due to the advantages like moderate reaction conditions and less by product formation. In a separate report Navarro et al. explored different transition metal mediated dehalogenative cross coupling strategies employed in constructing valuable chemicals. 156 In 2025, Shi et al. presented a detailed highlight on transition-metal-free cross-coupling methodologies, with particular emphasis on dehalogenative transformations, accompanied by a critical evaluation of reaction mechanisms and scope. 157

The review by Malmir et al. in 2018 highlights significant recent advances in catalyst design, reaction development, and mechanistic understanding of the Buchwald-Hartwig amination for C-N bond formation, with particular emphasis on its application in the construction of diverse heterocyclic systems. 158 Baroliya et al. 159 provided a comprehensive overview of recent advances in palladium-catalyzed XEC transformations, highlighting novel strategies, mechanistic insights, ligand and catalyst design, substrate scope, and synthetic applications. Additionally, current challenges and future directions in this fast-progressing field, aiming to inspire further innovation in sustainable catalysis are discussed ( Fig. 9 ).

Over the years much effort has been dedicated by the researchers to synthesis of axially chiral biaryls 81 as they are important class of compounds found in chiral ligands, materials, physiologically active natural products, and organocatalysts. A number of synthetic strategies have been revealed for constructing atropisomers, among these catalytic asymmetric Suzuki-Miyaura cross-coupling reaction is well known. Apart from this, catalytic reductive cross electrophile coupling reactions also have become a potent method for the formation of C-C bonds. Although, there are few reports on homo-coupling of aryl electrophiles, 160-163 but the enantioselective reductive cross-coupling between two heteroaryl electrophiles are quite difficult, because of the similar reactivity of the two C(sp 2 )-electrophiles. To counter above mentioned issue, scientists have given enormous effort on the selective activation of aryl electrophiles, to achieve the desired cross-selectivity. 164 Even with the great advancements in this field, 165-167 it is quite challenging to access axially chiral unsymmetrical biaryls through direct reductive cross-coupling of two electrophiles. Last few decades, there is tremendous progress in area of synthetic organic electrochemistry, because it enables researchers to regulate the redox chemistry with a level of accuracy that is uncommon in organic chemistry. Very recently (2024), Xu and his research group 168 have demonstrated enantioselective reductive cross-coupling of two arylhalides 89 and 90 on compiling cobalt catalysis with electrochemistry to obtained axially chiral biaryls 91 with good chemoselectivities (cross-coupling: homo-coupling >20 : 1) and enantioselectivities (up to 95% ee) ( Scheme 16 ). In initial search, they evaluated their hypothesis by choosing two aryl bromides 89a and 90a bearing electron-donating groups as model substrates. Then they optimized the reaction condition by reacting aryl bromide 89a (0.3 mmol, 1.0 equiv.), with aryl iodide 90a (0.6 mmol, 2.0 equiv.) using stainless steel as a cathode and an iron rod as a sacrificial anode. The optimized conditions are CoI 2 (0.045 mmol, 15 mol%) as catalyst, indane-fused pyrox (pyridine-oxazoline) as the chiral ligand (L) (0.09 mmol, 30 mol%), NaI (0.3 mmol, 1.0 equiv.) as electrolyte, 4 Å molecular sieve (MS) (70 mg), and 5 mL of dimethylacetamide (DMAc) as solvent under constant current electrolysis at 1 mA in an undivided cell. However, good enantioselectivity was achieved by the combination of 1-bromo-2 (benzyl)-naphthoate or 1-iodo-2-(acetyl)-naphthalene 89 with 1-bromo-2-(benzyloxy)-naphthalene 90. Following standard reaction condition, further they explored the substrate scope of the electroreductive cross-coupling reaction. Naphthalene containing varieties of functional groups such as alkyl, ether, alkene, and ester are well compatible with this methodology and produced desired unsymmetrical axially chiral biaryls in good yields with high enantioselectivity. Aryl-vinyl system also suitable for catalytic aryl-aryl cross-coupling reaction. They observed that cobalt-catalyzed cross coupling reaction between 2-benzyloxy-1-iodonaphthalene and benzyl 1-chloro-6-methoxy-3,4-dihydronaphthalene-2 carboxylate took place smoothly, and the target product 91a was obtained in 95% ee after slight modification on reaction condition. The substrate scope and generality also investigated in case of alkene. Alkenyl halogenated substrate containing diverse functionality such as phenyl, alkyl, halogen, ester at 6-postion react efficiently and gives desired product with very good yield. Presence of strong electron releasing or electron withdrawing at 5 and 7 position of the alkenyl substrate also produced in very good synthetic yield in this electro reductive cross-coupling reaction. Based on some controlled experiments and DFT calculation, they explained the mechanism of the cross-coupling reaction as depicted in Scheme 16 . Based on the recent studies, 169 the mechanistic pathway was explored. At very beginning, poor coordinating group carbonyl facilitates the oxidative addition of cobalt to electron-deficient aryl bromide 89a in the presence of electron-rich aryl iodide 90a, afforded intermediates 89aa and 90aa with same proportion. Intermediate 89aa, then preferentially reduced to 89ab as this step depends on the red-ox potential of the metal-complex, which being determined by the ligad aryl moiety. After that 89ab coupled with 90aa to produce 89ac which underwent reductive elimination to form the chiral cross-coupled biaryls product 91a in the presence of chiral ligands ( Scheme 16 ).

Authors disclosed an excellent electrochemical cross-coupling strategy between aromatic carbocycles, but the study did not include any case study on heteroaromatic moiety. Investigation of the present protocol on heteroarenes may provide inspiring results and pave the new dimension of research.

The C(sp 2 )-C(sp 3 ) bond is one of the most important chemical bonds, found in many natural products, pharmaceuticals and other organic compounds. Dehalogenative arylation of alkyl halides is consider among cheapest method for the construction of C(sp 2 )-C(sp 3 ) bond. Over the year several synthetic strategies such as Negishi reaction, transition-metal-catalyzed reducing cross-coupling etc. have been developed. But all these protocols require excess use of metal reductants, and also suffer from erratic stirring effects. Therefore, development of simple, eco friendly, efficient method for the formation of C(sp 2 )-C(sp 3 ) bond is very much desirable.

Electrochemical organic synthesis is considered as one of the green and alternative synthetic pathways, due to its mild reaction condition and high selectivity. 170 In this context, recently Jinping Lan and his coworkers 171 demonstrated a simple and efficient dehalogenative arylation of unactivated alkyl halides using transition metal, mediator, and additive free electrochemical reductive coupling Scheme 17 . In the initial search, bromocyclohexane 92a and 1, 4-dicyanobenzene 93a were chosen as a model substrate. After conducting a comprehensive analysis, they optimized the reaction condition for this transformation and the best result was obtained using an undivided cell, furnished with carbon felt (CF) as the cathode and zinc plate as anode in constant current flow of 9 mA, employing Et 4 NCl as electrolyte in CH 3 CN under nitrogen atmosphere at room temperature, and the desired coupling product obtained in 74% isolated yield. After optimization, they looked upon the reaction's scope and universality of different alkyl halide substrates 92. Different alkyl halides with diverse functionality were demonstrated, and dehalogenative arylated products 93 were obtained in moderate to good yields. Further, the substrate scope of aryl nitriles was also examined. Various dicyano aromatic compounds, such as 2,5-dicyanotoluene, 1, 2-dicyanobenzene were reacted with cyclohexyl bromide 92a, and provided corresponding coupling products in good yields. In addition, aromatic nitriles containing reductable functionalities, including ester, sulfone, and sulfonamide etc. were reliable coupling partners, and capitalized desired product in moderate yield. Most importantly, this electrochemical method successfully accomplished for the synthesis of the histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor zabadinostat (CXD101). Based on experimental investigations, cyclic voltammetry (CV) studies, a plausible mechanism for the dehalogenative arylation reaction is proposed via initial single-electron reduction of 93a at the cathode generates radical anion 93aa. On the other hand, single-electron transfer (SET) of 92a form a radical anion 92aa, which then undergoes bromide anion extrusion to afford alkyl radical 92ab. Radical-radical anion coupling between alkyl radical 92ab and radical anion 93aa delivered the desired product 94a, accompanied by the release of a cyanide anion. Concurrently, sacrificial zinc is oxidized at the anode to generate Zn 2+ .

Although the present report describes an efficient electrochemical dehalogenative cross-coupling strategy using cyanoaryl derivatives, its practical applicability remains limited. Moreover, the participation of heteroaryl cyanides with alkyl halides in such cross-coupling reactions has not yet been explored.

Gem-difluoroalkenes are important structural unit, found in many biologically important and drugs molecules. Moreover, they being unique bioisosteres of carbonyl group, can mimic the reactivity of same functional group and open up a new avenue in drug discovery. 172,173 Traditionally, gem -difluoroalkenes were synthesized through varieties of simple and efficient methods. In spite of remarkable efficiency, these protocols also suffer from some drawbacks, such as limited substrate scope, concerning structural diversity or functional group tolerance among others. In order to address all of these issues, electrochemistry has lately emerged as a potent synthetic tool that permits a wide range of mild reductive transformations to be carried out without the need for a catalyst or reducing agents. In this context, Haoxiang Zhang et al. 174 (2022) have demonstrated a sustainable, convenient and environmentally friendly electrochemical strategy for synthesis of diverse gem -difluoroalkenes 97 from different kinds of alkyl radical precursors including organohalides, N -hydroxyphthalimide (NHP) esters, and Katritzky salts Scheme 19 . The initial electrochemical searching was done by reacting trifluoromethyl-substituted alkene 95a and 4-iodotetrahydro-2 H -pyran 96a in a simple undivided cell equipped with an iron plate anode and a nickel plate cathode as the working electrodes. After initial evaluation, the reaction condition was standardized and the best outcome was achieved by conducting the reaction taking 0.5 mmol of 95a, 0.9 mmol of 96a, and using iron plate as anode, Ni plate cathode, in presence of Et 3 N base employing n Bu 4 NI as electrolyte (0.1 mmol, 0.02 M), in DMF solvents (5.0 mL), at constant current flow of 3 mA under ambient temperature for 12 h. With the optimized reaction condition in hand, next they evaluated substrate scope. Different α-trifluoromethyl alkenes were reacted with 4-iodotetrahydro-2( H )-pyran (96a) under optimized reaction condition, and afforded the targeted products in moderate to good yields. Various electron donating and withdrawing groups containing benzene ring and several poly or hetero aromatic ring bearing α-trifluoromethyl alkenes, all of which gives the desired gem -difluoro olefins in respectable yields. Further, they also broadened the substrate scope to include carboxylic acid derivatives rather than organohalides in order to better illustrate the suitability and applicability of the methodology. In addition, α-trifluoromethyl alkenes were reacted with a variety of aliphatic Katritzky salts, including primary, secondary, and tertiary alkyl-substituted ones, to produce the required products in good synthetic yields. All of these findings clearly shows that the electrochemical approach can be compatible with a wide range of α-trifluoromethyl alkenes as well as a variety of alkyl radical precursors, such as organohalides, N -hydroxyphthalimide (NHP) esters, and Katritzky salts. One of the most significant demonstrations of the present electrochemical technique is that it provides a new route for the synthesis of gem -difluoroalkenes. On the basis of controlled experiments and previous experiments, insight mechanism of the defluorinative cross-coupling reaction was proposed ( Scheme 18 ). Initially, substrate 96 (organohalides, NHP esters, and Katritzky salts) undergoes single electron transfer (SET) cathodic reduction, to produced aliphatic carbon-centered radical 96aa, which then reacts with α-trifluoromethyl alkene 95, to generate 96ab. Subsequently, radical 96ab undergoes cathodic reduction to provide α-CF 3 carbanion 96ac. In the final step, β-fluoride elimination of 96ac, afforded gem -difluoroalkene 97a.

Although herein this article authors presented an efficient approach to generate gem -difluoroalkene but they restricted the study with organohalides, NHP esters, and Katritzky salts as an electrophilic counter substrate to generate the alkyl radical. Further exploration of reaction with trifluoromethylbenzene and Katritzky salts is remaining.

Reductive allylation 175,176 is one of most powerful tools, widely used for the synthesis of medicinal drugs, natural products, and biologically active molecules. Conventional reductive allylation stitches sp 3 and sp 2 carbon precursors together using transition-metal catalysts. Because of the increasing demand for sustainable and green chemistry in recent years, synthetic chemists have been progressively used electrochemical synthesis. There are several reports on electrochemical reductive allylation using different metal catalyst. Very recently (2022) W. Chen et al. 177 demonstrated nickel-catalyzed reductive cross coupling allylation of alkyl or aryl halides 99, using a range of allylic reagents 98 under milder, environmentally friendly, and more effective electrochemical conditions ( Scheme 19 ). After initial trail with different reagents and catalytic system, the reaction condition was optimized. They observed that the desired product 100a was obtained in 75% isolated yield employing nickel foam as the cathode iron sheet as the sacrificial anode, n Bu 4 NBr as the electrolyte, L1 as the ligand and DMSO as solvent. With the standardized reaction condition in hand, they explore the substrate scope of the protocol. A series of iodobenzene having electron donating and electron withdrawing at para position are well tolerated with this methodology. 2-Naphthyl iodide gives lower yield (36%) of the target molecule, owing to the easy protonation of the resulting aryl nickel intermediates. The protocol is equally compatible with alkyl iodides. The open-chain alkanes and 6-membered rings containing nitrogen or oxygen were likewise suitable for delivering the desired products in a 67% yield. Heteroatom containing four and five membered rings also produces the corresponding products with moderate yield. The protocol also investigated the substrate scope for various trifluoroalkenes. The target products were produced in moderate to good yields by the reaction using the common substituents isopropyl, sulfide, ester, and chlorine. Furthermore, the methodology also compatible for the heterocycles quinoline, benzothiophene, and methylated indole gave the target products in moderate yields. In addition, they also applied the protocol for the electrochemical reductive coupling of aryl halides with other olefination reagents such as sulphonate, MBH ester, acetate oxalate etc. , and all the cases they obtained desired product in moderate to good yield. On the light of literature survey and control experiments, the mechanism of this reductive cross-coupling was proposed ( Scheme 19 ). Initially, Ni(0) complex 98ad was formed in situ , and that selectively undergoes oxidative addition with iodobenzene 99 to form Ph-Ni( ii )I species 99aa. On cathodic reduction of 99aa, afforded intermediate Ni( i )Ph 99ab. Later on, migratory insertion of olefin 98a to intermediate 99ab, produce nickel( i ) species 98ab. Subsequently rapid β-fluorine elimination from 98ab deliver desired product 100a. Again, reduction of F-Ni( i )F afforded Ni(0) to complete the cycle.

Although the authors present an efficient approach for the generation of gem -difluoroalkenes, the current scope is limited to aryl and alkyl iodides as electrophilic but remains silent about carbonyl, acid chlorides etc. as coupling partners. Expanding the study to include a broader range of electrophilic precursors could further enhance the generality and impact of the methodology.

1,1-diarylalkanes are privilege scaffolds, present in numerous naturally occurring compounds and in broad spectrum of biologically and pharmacologically active compounds . 178,179 Much effort has been given by the researchers to develop new strategies for the synthesis of such important moieties. Transition metal catalyzed cross-coupling of benzylic and aryl halides or nickel catalyzed reductive cross-coupling reaction have been extensively used for the synthesis of 1,1-diarylalkanes. 180 Owing to meet sustainability requirements by reducing waste formation and cost reduction, organo electrosynthesis consider as one of the green and eco-friendly synthesis and hence there is growing demand on electrochemical mediated metal-catalyzed cross-coupling reactions. 73,181 As this approach offers an alternative pathway, which substitute hazardous or/and toxic reductants and oxidants by electric current. In this regard, recently Kumar et al. 182 have disclosed nickle-catalyzed electrochemical approach of cross-coupling of aryl and alkyl halides and electroreductive hydroarylation ( Scheme 20 ). They started their search by choosing phenylethyl bromide 101a and bromoanisole 102a as model substrate and they optimized the reaction condition by changing parameters including electrodes (cathodes and anodes), electrolytes, current densities, solvents, concentrations and nickel complexes. After a series of comprehensive experiments, the reaction condition was optimized by reacting 0.15 M aryl bromide 102 with 0.30 M alkyl bromide 101 in presence of 10 mol% of nickle catalyst, KBr as electrolyte (0.075 M), using stainless steel as cathode and anode in N , N -dimethylacetamide (DMA) of constant current flow of 1.5 mA cm -2 , and obtained up to 92% of the desired product. Keeping optimum condition in hand, substrate scope of the current methodology was explorer employing different bromoalkyl-aryl and bromo(het)aryl compounds. Phenyl-alkyl bromides bearing different substituents having varieties electronic properties are well tolerated. Both electron donating and electron withdrawing substituents like methoxy, alkyl, halide or trifluoromethyl group as well as heteroaryl and bulkier 1-naphthalenyl are well compatible with this methodology and gives desired products in good to excellent yields.

Based on the DFT calculation and CV studies, they proposed the mechanistic insight of the Ni-catalyzed electro reductive reaction. In the beginning, Ni 0 species was formed at the cathode surface. Thereafter, Ni 0 undergoes oxidative addition to aryl bromide 102 to generate 102a followed by one electron reduction results in the formation of intermediate 102b. Later on, oxidative addition to alkyl bromide via SET process produces alkyl radical 101a and intermediate 102c, this on single electron cathodic reduction, leads to the formation of intermediate 102d. Subsequent addition of alkyl radical 101a to Ni I -Ar intermediate 102d, results in formation of intermediate 102e, from which β-hydride elimination followed by migratory insertion of olefin provided intermediate 102g. Next on chain walking process produce thermodynamically more stable benzylic-nickel complex 102h, which subsequently undergoes reductive elimination, provides desired product 1,1-diarylalkane cross-coupling product 103.

Authors presented an excellent electrochemial dehalogenative cross-coupling reaction of aryl-bromide but they employed arylated alkylbromide as another coupling partners. The reaction of alkyl halide, alkenyl, alkynyl halides may results interesting findings for future research.

Almost half of all C-C bond-forming reactions carried out in industry are through metal-catalyzed coupling reactions. The reductive coupling of two electrophilic reagents in a cross-electrophile coupling (XEC) is a more efficient method of forming C-C bonds since the nucleophilic substrate is often an organometallic species that is generated independently from an electrophile. XEC reactions are carried out using Ni-complex and super stoichiometric amount of metal powder with excess quantities of additives and activators. 183-186 Apart from the safety and scalability issues, XEC reactions work best for couplings of primary alkyl halides, whereas reactions involving secondary or tertiary substrates necessitate a significant amount of catalyst modification or redesign. The industry's reliance on these techniques highlights the critical importance of XEC as an efficient, cost-effective, and scalable approach for the direct coupling of a broad range of substrates. Owing to the great demand of green and eco-friendly synthesis, electrochemical reduction offer an alternative approach to the XEC reactions to chemical reduction or photoredox initiation as it is intrinsically applicable to net reductive processes. In electrochemical reduction, electrons are release from benign electron sources, therefore metal powders or costly silanes that hinder the large-scale synthesis can be eliminated from coupling reactions. Furthermore, electrochemistry can easily activate new catalyst systems with enhanced reactivities and selectivities. Although recently, a significant progress has been made on electrochemical cross-electrophile coupling (XEC) reaction, but these techniques are still in their infancy compared to the well-established XEC strategies. The electrochemical XEC reaction has the number of drawbacks, such as (i) lower yield percentage, when the substrates are other than primary electrophiles, (ii) needed divided cells for more complex substrates, (iii) the reaction is carried out at high temperatures, which frequently promote proto dehalogenation and (iv) low current densities result in low chemical through put. In this context, Blaise L. Truesdell and his co-workers have developed an electrosynthetic strategy of XEC reaction which is broadly applicable, practical, and scalable ( Scheme 21 ). 187 This strategy enables to capitalize a wide range of secondary alkyl bromides and aryl, heteroaryl, or vinyl bromides. The reaction was carried out in an undivided cell at room temperature using inexpensive catalysts and shuttles that are simple to make on 50 g scales. Electroreduction was performed with a constant current of 3 mA in an undivided cell with a Ni-foam cathode and a Zn anode, at room temperature and using 4-bromobiphenyl 104 and cyclohexylbromide 105 (secondary alkyl electrophiles) as model substrates in DMA solvent, employing KPF 6 as electrolyte. Several Ni-Ligand complexes were used to catalyze the process, however ligand L1 in association with S4 produced the best results with the maximum selectivity of the desired product 106 over the undesirable byproducts. With the optimized reaction condition in hand, they evaluated the scope of the electrochemical XEC reaction for secondary alkyl electrophiles 105. High yields of cross products were obtained for all tested ring sizes in case of aryl bromide and alicyclic bromide. Likewise, the XEC reaction was found to be compatible with both strained and unstrained heterocyclic alkyl electrophiles, and obtained coupled products in high isolated yields. Apart from alicyclic electrophiles, acyclic alkyl electrophiles also undergo coupling reaction without isomerized to produce high-yield products. Next, they extended the substrate scope of arylhalide 104 in coupling reactions with secondary alkyl electrophiles. Under mild reaction condition, electron-neutral and electron-rich bromoarenes produce products in high yields, although electron-deficient aryl bromides are typically the most reactive. However, only small amounts of cross products were produced by reactions of substrates containing highly electron-releasing groups, like p -dimethylamino (106h, 36%), with secondary electrophiles. A gerenal cross-electrophilic coupling reaction pathway was proposed by the authors to generate the desired products 106 where two cross-electrophiles 104 and 105 undergors coupling via a radical intermediacy under the influence of Ni-complex meditaed redox coupled in an undivided electrochemical cell.

The authors performed an excellent electrochemical cross-electrophilic dehagenative coupling with primary and secondary alkyl bromides. The C(sp 2 )-C(sp 3 ) cross-coupling between alkyl halide may deliver important research findings which may lead to new dimension of future research.

DECYANATIVE CROSS-COUPLING
Electrochemical decyanative cross-coupling has recently emerged as a valuable strategy for transforming nitriles into versatile coupling partners for C-C and C-heteroatom bond formation. In these reactions, the strong C-CN bond is selectively cleaved under electrochemical conditions, typically via single-electron transfer processes that generate carbon-centered radicals or organometallic intermediates, which then engage in cross-coupling with a wide range of electrophiles. The use of electrochemistry enables precise control over redox events without the need for stoichiometric oxidants or reductants, thereby enhancing functional-group tolerance and operational safety. Recent developments, particularly in transition-metal catalysis (such as nickel and copper etc ), tailored electrode materials, and reaction design, have significantly expanded substrate scope and improved reaction efficiency and selectivity. By enabling the valorization of readily accessible nitrile-containing compounds under mild and sustainable conditions, electrochemical decyanative cross-coupling offers a green and practical alternative to conventional methods and holds promise for applications in medicinal chemistry, materials science, and late-stage functionalization. Fig. 10 summarizes a selection of illustrative highlights beyond electrochemical decyanative cross-coupling reactions, underscoring recent advances in deaminative transformations and demonstrating the versatility of these methodologies across different reaction platforms. In 2021, Li et al. 188 consized recent advances in radical-mediated decyanative alkylation of cyano(hetero)arenes enabled by photo- and electrochemical strategies, wherein C(sp 3 )-H, C(sp 2 )-H, C-C, or C-hetero bonds are cleaved to furnish new C-C bonds via radical pathways; the underlying reaction mechanisms were also systematically discussed. In 2022, Paul et al. 189 published an illustrative review on recent developments in decyanative functionalization reactions, with particular emphasis on a critical discussion of selectivity, efficiency, reaction mechanisms, and inherent limitations. Recently in 2025, Zhou et al. 190 summarized recent advances in decyanative arylation enabled by radical cross-coupling reactions via single-electron reduction of (hetero)aromatic nitriles to generate persistent radical anion intermediates, while transient carbon-centered radicals formed via cleavage of C-H, C-C, or C-X bonds (X = B, N, Si, S, Br) through single-electron transfer or hydrogen-atom transfer pathways.

The construction of C(sp 3 )-C(sp 2 ) bonds represent one of the most fundamental transformations in organic chemistry. Owing to its broad applicability, this reaction has been extensively employed in the synthesis of functionalized and structurally complex molecules. 191 The task even challenging, in absence of transition metal catalysis or strong base. Functionalized aromatic nitriles are important compound as they are useful in pharmaceutcals, making functional materials and photocatalyst. One of the convenient way of making aromatic nitriles can be functionalized through radical-mediated decyanation cross-coupling reaction via C(sp 3 )-C(sp 2 ) bond formation, and the resulting compounds are important in drugs, optoelectronic devices, photocatalysis and dyes. 192 Over the last few years, visible-light mediated photoredox catalysis has become a potent and alluring method for the synthesis of different organic compounds, owing to the simple and mild reaction conditions. Although photoredox mediated decyanation cross-coupling reactions of cyanoarenes made considerable progress recently, nevertheless in order to achieve high conversion rate, the costly transition metal catalyst and the non-recyclable organocatalyst were unavoidably required, which could lead to additional application issues. So, the development of an efficient, greener and environmental friendly approach of decyanation cross-coupling is highly desirable. It has been observed that synthetic electrochemistry is a potent and ecologically safe method for redox transformations, where a substrate can easily transform into products in high yields while selectively losing or gaining electrons at the electrode surface. Recently, many research group have demonstrated oxidative electro-synthetic methods for the construction of C(sp 3 )-C(sp 2 ) bond. In comparison to electrochemical oxidation, electrochemical reduction reactions are significantly less reported with the use of sacrificial anodes or reductants. The electrode fouling or interfering with desirable cathodic reactions is a difficult and challenging issue. Very recently, M. Wang et al. 193 have reported a direct electro-reduction strategy to build the carbon (sp 3 )-carbon (sp 2 ) bonds by the reaction of aromatic nitriles 107 and alkyl iodides or bromides 108 via electrochemical radical/radical anion cross-coupling reaction. Initially, a series of experiments were conducted to achieve the optimal reaction conditions. At the beginning, 1-bromobutane 108a and 1,4-dicyanobenzene 107a were chosen as model substrates and the experiment was done in an undivided cell equipped with a Fe(foam) anode and Pt cathode under the constant electrolysis using n Bu 4 NBF 4 as electrolyte and K 3 PO 4 as base in mixture of MeCN (2 mL) and DMF (4 mL) as the solvent, The desired product 109a was obtained in 64% yield under the reaction conditions. After initial screening with several solvent system, bases and electrolytes the optimal reaction conditions was achieved. After fixing the standard reaction conditions, next they explored the substrate scope of the methodology. The substrate scope was extended from primary to secondary alkyl bromides as well as acyclic to cyclic secondary alkyl bromides, and all these cases the target products were obtained in very good yields. Various alkyl bromides containing o -, and p -methyl group (109j & 109k) or chlorine atom 109h) on the phenyl ring gives corresponding products in good yield. Aromatic nitrile containing other electron deficient group e.g. 4-(methylsulfonyl) benzonitrile 109l and methyl 4-cyanobenzoate 109i were also compatible with the C(sp 3 )-C(sp 2 ) cross-coupling reaction and provided target products in moderate (43%) to good (55%) yield. Most significantly, under standard electrochemical conditions, the cholesterol-relevant bioactive molecule was achieved from naturally existing drug molecule containing an iodine group. Many controlled experiments such as radical trapping, cyclic voltammetry (CV) was performed to gain insight the mechanism of the electrochemical transformation. The reaction was proposed to initiate via single electron cathodic reduction of aromatic nitrile 107a to form dicyanobenzene radical anion (DCA) 107aa. Electron transfer from later to n -butyl bromide 108a, gives n -butyl radical 108aa in presence of base. Finally, coupling between DCA 107aa and n -butyl radical 108aa through rdical-radical anion cross coupling and departure of CN - , afforded desired product 109a ( Scheme 22 ).

The authors have demonstrated an elegant electrochemical decyanative cross-coupling of aryl and alkyl halides. However, the substrate scope does not encompass heteroaryl halides; evaluating these substrates could provide valuable mechanistic and synthetic insights and potentially broaden the applicability of the methodology.

Alcohols are one of the important classes of functional group in organic synthesis which can be readily prepared using Schlenk technique or other alternative approaches such as reductive arylation of aldehydes or ketones using transition-metal catalysis or photocatalysis strategies. However, owing to the use of stoichiometric reductant and sophisticated metal catalysts in the reductive-coupling reaction or precious metal-based catalysts in the photocatalytic reaction their practical applications are limited. In the recent years synthetic chemists have been extensively using electrochemical synthesis, since it has been shown to be a scalable, environmentally safe, and orthogonal method for redox transformations, 194 where the substrate can selectively absorb or lose electrons at the electrode surface. Over the past decades much effort has been given to explore in the field of redox neutral reactions. Conversely, to date the majority of synthetic electrochemical reaction has been documented as a single half electrode reaction (cathodic reduction, anodic oxidation). Despite being also known as convergent paired electrolysis, electrochemical redox neutral reactions are more energy-efficient and synthetically useful protocol, but it is in the infancy stage of development. Convergent paired electrolysis mainly suffers two major difficulties (a) poorly developed cathodic reduction is the bottle neck for paired electrolysis and (b) the reactive species which are formed in situ should react quickly with each other to subdue the undesired side reactions. Consequently, great effort has been devoted to address these issues. Despite the excellent advancement in this area, the electrochemical redox-neutral α-arylation of alcohols yet to be explored, because of there is less development of cathodic reductive arylation. In this context recently in 2021, Sheng Zhang and his research group have revealed an electrochemical α-arylation of alcohols based on the knowledge of electroreductive arylation of aldehydes and ketones ( Scheme 23 ). 195 Beginning with commercially accessible carbonyl compounds or benzylic alcohols (111), this method provides a broad and scalable access to secondary and tertiary alcohols. Compared to the traditional synthetic methods, this technique is more attractive due to its excellent tolerance for wide functional groups (such as ester, amide, amine, thioether, and borate), mild reaction conditions (free of metal catalysts and external reductants), good scalability (>10 gram-scale), and site-selectivity. In initial search, the substrate 110a reacted with benzaldehyde 111a in a well-equipped undivided cell having a graphite anode and nickel cathode under constant current electrolysis provided near about quantitative yield of the desired product. After initial screening, they optimized the reaction condition for this transformation and the best result was obtained by caring out the reaction using 1 mmol of cyano compound with 2 mmol of aldehyde, employing 1 mmol of n Bu 4 NOAc as electrolyte, with 1 mmol valeraldehyde as an additive in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), at constant current flow of 16 mA, for 6 h, at 50 °C. After optimization, they looked upon the reaction's scope and versatility. A systematic investigation of electronic effects using a variety of para -substituted benzaldehydes revealed that the electron-donating groups afforded higher product yields compared to electron-withdrawing groups. The methodology was also compatible with multiply substituted aldehydes, fused aromatic ring systems, and heterocyclic substrates, delivering moderate to good yields. On the basis of previously published reports 105 and experimental observation, the mechanistic analysis was revealed. 106 At the very beginning single electron anodic reduction of benzylic alcohol 111a afforded intermediate radical cation 111aa. Thereafter, deprotonation of intermediate 111aa, afforded benzylic radical 111ab, which may produce desired product through two possible pathways (either Path-a or Path-b). In path-a, benzylic radical 111ab undergoes coupling reaction with anion 110aa, generated through cathodic reduction of 110aa, to produce intermediate 110ab. Finally, CN - elimination from intermediate 110ab, afforded desired product 112a. In path-b, benzaldehyde 111ac generated through SET oxidation of 111ab, undergoes coupling reaction with anion 110ab, generated through reduction of 110aa, to produce intermediate 110ac. Finally, CN - elimination from the intermediate 110ac, afforded desired product 112a.

The authors have demonstrated an elegant electrochemical decyanative cross-coupling of aromatic carbonyl compounds and benzylic alcohols. However, the scope does not include aliphatic aldehydes and alcohols, the investigation of which could yield valuable insights and potentially open new avenues for future research.

DE-OXYGENATIVE CROSS-COUPLING
Electrochemical deoxygenative cross-coupling has emerged as a powerful and sustainable approach for C-C and C-heteroatom bond formation by enabling the selective removal of oxygen-based functional groups from readily available alcohols and carbonyl derivatives. In these transformations, oxygen-containing substrates-often activated as redox-active esters, carbonates, phosphates, or sulfonates undergo electrochemical single-electron-transfer (SET) to generate carbon-centered radicals or organometallic intermediates that subsequently participate in cross-coupling reactions. The electrochemical platform eliminates the need for stoichiometric reductants, allowing precise control of redox events through applied potential and improving functional-group tolerance. Recent advances in transition-metal catalysis, particularly Fe-, Cu- and Ni-mediated systems, as well as improvements in electrode materials and cell design, have significantly broadened substrate scope and enhanced efficiency and selectivity. 196,197 Owing to its mild conditions, use of abundant oxygenated feedstocks, and compatibility with late-stage functionalization, electrochemical deoxygenative cross-coupling represents a green and scalable alternative to conventional methodologies and continues to gain importance in sustainable organic synthesis. Few illustrative highlights other than electrochemical deoxygenative cross-coupling reactions have been depicted in Fig. 11 . In 2020, Shao et al. summarised the recent advances and discoveries in P III -assisted direct deoxygenative reactions under photochemical encompassing critical analysis of reaction parameters, reaction parameters and scopes with details examples. 198 In another report, Terrett et al. disclosed a mild catalytic alcohol activation strategy that enables the direct use of alcohols as carbocation precursors for nucleophilic coupling, allowing formation of C-O, C-S, C-C, and C-N bonds with a diverse array of nucleophiles. 199 In 2025, Tan et al. documented recent advances in light-enabled deoxygenative transformations of alcohols and systematically examined radical-mediated C-O bond scission strategies in photoredox systems, clarifying the generation mechanisms and transformation patterns of radical intermediates across distinct reaction pathways. 200

Ketones and aldehydes are essential precursors for organic synthesis due to their widespread chemical production and easy availability from natural sources. 201 Thus, enhancing chemical and biomass feedstocks requires the development of an effective process for the deoxygenative functionalization of these oxygen-containing groups. However, the high bond energy of the C-O double bond and the requirement for eco-friendly methods make direct deoxygenation difficult. 202 To overcome this several innovative strategies have been adopted in literature including carbene, carbanion, and radical pathway engaging substitution, elimination, and addition reaction to get reactive intermediate for the desired transformations. 203 Even though the aforementioned techniques offer a number of effective choices for the deoxygenative functionalization of carbonyls, they nevertheless face a number of difficulties, such as necessity for potential reluctants, use of costly metal catalysts, often narrow substrate scope and extended reaction times limit the widespread application of these methods.

Recently, Yao et al. have explored a sustainable electrochemical strategy for the deoxyarylation of aromatic carbonyls using closo -boranes (Et 4 N) 2 B 10 H 10 as a de-oxidant ( Scheme 24 ). 204 They started examining the electrochemical deoxyarylation reaction between 1-indanone (113a) and terephthalonitrile (114a) in an undivided cell using a platinum plate as the cathode and a carbon rod as the anode to form deoxyarylated product 115. During optimization, the ideal conditions for the most successful conversion were found to be 0.3 mmol of 113a, 2.0 equiv. of 114a, and 0.8 equiv. of (Et 4 N) 2 B 10 H 10 in 10 mL DMSO electrolyzed with a constant current of 17 mA (7.56 mA cm -2 ) in a nitrogen environment kept at 60 °C in a heating module for 9 hours. With the optimized reaction conditions, they next evaluated the substrate scope of the electrochemical deoxyarylation process. Wide range of aromatic ketones with diverse functionalities including acetonaphthone, acetamide, heterocyclic, and alicyclic ketones were well tolerated under the reaction condition to provide the desired products in good to excellent isolated yields. Gratifyingly, few sterically hindered and mild electron rich aromatic aldehydes were effectively converted to corresponding products. After conducting several controlled experiments including kinetic experiments, cyclic voltammetry (CV), and electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR), they validated the reaction pathway proceeding through step-wise electro-reduction process for deoxyarylation. The initial SET reduction of terephthalonitrile 114 lead to the formation of radical anion 114a which generates the key intermediate 113ab following nuclceophilic addition to 113 and decyanation-re-aromatization process involving species 113a & 113aa. The de-oxygenation is triggered by 114′a, an active deoxidant generated from (Et 4 N) 2 B 10 H 10 via one-electron oxidation. A radical polar cross-over process resulted carbanion 113ad which ultimately provide the desired products 115.

Though authors have designed an unique electrochemical deoxyarylation strategy, but necessity of terephthalonitrile as a counter-substrate for successful conversion to the desired products may limit the general application of this method. The fate of the reaction with acyl chloride, ester with p- dicyanobenzene is not being disclosed as precursor which may instigate further research and developement.

Aromatic amines are special compounds that are used extensively in the fields of agriculture, colours, medicine, and material science. Traditionally, amines are prepared through reductive hydrogenation or through reductive coupling reactions, however, all of these processes mostly depend on transition metals and frequently need to add reductive agents. Over the years scientists have been working on sustainable development and green strategies, to reduce the usages of harmful metals and toxic chemicals in organic synthesis. Recently, electrochemical cathodic reduction methods for the preparation of amines (from nitro arenes) have drawn a lot of interest, owing to their powerful and alluring approach. In this regard, very recently (2025) Ziliang Wang et al. 205 have demonstrated an efficient, mild and safe electrolytic method for cathodic deoxygenative alkylation reaction between nitro(hetero)arenes and organic halides, resulted in C-N bond formation using bis(pinacolato)diboron (B 2 pin 2 ) and LiCl as additives ( Scheme 25 ). This methodology not only capitalized a wide range of functional groups, but also shows practicality and late-stage modification of various bioactive molecules. In the beginning, nitrobenzene and (1-bromoethyl)benzene was chosen as model substrates, and the electrolytic reaction was carried out under several electrolytic conditions with changing solvent system and electrolyte. After initial screening, the reaction condition was optimized. The best result was obtained by reacting 0.2 mmol of 116a with 1.5 equiv. of 117a in an undivided cell equipped with Zn anode and Sn cathode using B 2 pin 2 and LiCl as additives in DMA solvent at room temperature in air for 7 hours of constant current electrolysis ( j = 10 mA cm -2 )., The reaction provided targeted product 118a in an 83% yield. With the optimized reaction condition in hand, further they investigate the substrate scope of the deoxygenative alkylation reaction. Wide range of nitroaromatics containing diverse functional groups such as methyl, ethyl, hydroxyl, acetoxy, methylthio, morpholinyl, fluorine, chlorine, bromine, ester, pyridine etc. were compatible with the electrochemical system, afforded desired product in moderate to good yields. In parallel they also looked upon the substrate scope for organic bromides, different electron donating and withdrawing substituents attached in benzene ring of benzyl bromide also efficiently reacted with nitrobenzene and afforded desired products in very good yields.

The applicability of the electrochemical method was proven by one step synthesis of a number of bioactive compounds having antibacterial and antifungal activities and also last-stage modification of several biologically important compounds.

Based on extensive experimental studies, a plausible mechanism for the cathodic deoxygenative alkylation was proposed. Cathodic reduction of alkyl halides 117 generates either radical or carbanion intermediates (117aa), which, in the presence of B 2 pin 2 and LiCl, are converted into anionic adducts [B 2 pin 2 ˙R] - (117ab), with LiCl likely facilitating their stabilization and formation. Concurrently, nitro(hetero)arenes 116 undergoes cathodic reduction to nitroso intermediates (116aa), which react with 117ab to afford intermediates 116ae (path a). Subsequent elimination of pinBO - yields aminoboranes 116af, and hydrolysis along with release of pinBOH furnishes the desired products 118. Alternatively (path b), a minor portion of nitro(hetero)arenes reacts with B 2 pin 2 to form 116aa, which upon cathodic reduction and HOBpin elimination generates primary amines 116ab. These amines then undergo nucleophilic substitution with alkyl halides 117 under electrolytic conditions to deliver products 118.

Though the protocol was applied for the preparation of N -alkyl amines via reductive coupling reaction but they did not apply the electro-reductive procedure for the synthesis of pyrrole, pyridine, and imidazole analogues.

Alkyl- and aryl-substituted carboxylic acids have attracted significant attention in pharmaceutical research and development, as they serve not only as important starting materials for the synthesis of value-added products but also as key structural motifs in many drug molecules. 206 a Several commercially available pharmaceuticals, such as ibuprofen, (±)-naproxen, fenoprofen, hexoprofen, and buprofen, contain carboxylic acid as a principal functional group. 206 b Although considerable progress has been made in the conversion of alkyl halides into carboxylic acids through CO 2 utilization, further advancements are still required to achieve a more sustainable and environmentally benign process. In 2024, Y. Yuan et al. reported the electrochemical synthesis of carboxylic acids 120 from readily available and bench-stable alcohol derivatives 119 ( Scheme 26 ). The reaction was initiated using methyl-(1-phenylethyl) oxalate (119a), which was prepared from the corresponding alcohol, and subsequently reacted with CO 2 under electrochemical conditions employing an aluminum plate as the anode and a stainless-steel plate as the cathode. 207 Various supporting electrolytes, including n Bu 4 NBF 4 , n Bu 4 NPF 6 , n Bu 4 NBr, and n Bu 4 NI, were evaluated for the decarboxylative cross-coupling process; however, n Bu 4 NOAc was found to be the most effective electrolyte for promoting the coupling reaction. After the optimization, they prepared various carboxylic acids from the substrate 1-arylethanol-derived oxalates. The aryl substitution with both electron-donating (-Me and -OMe) and electron-withdrawing (-F, -Cl, -Br, and -CF 3 ) groups furnished the corresponding secondary carboxylic acids in 66-88% yields. Deoxygenative carboxylation products were also obtained from alicyclic oxalate derivatives, affording the corresponding cycloalkyl carboxylic acids under optimized conditions. Notably, this protocol was successfully applied for the synthesis of several pharmaceutically important molecules, such as ibuprofen (120i, 60%), (±)-naproxen (120j, 68%), fenoprofen (120k, 82%), hexoprofen (120l, 60%), and biprofen (120m, 75%). Moreover, the scope of the reaction was not only limited to secondary alcohols; primary and non-benzylic alcohols were also efficiently converted into the desired carboxylic acids via electroreductive deoxygenative carboxylation. To demonstrate the scalability of the reaction, the authors performed the transformation on a 20 mmol scale, affording 2-phenylpropanoic acid in 73% yield. Furthermore, the protocol was extended to downstream functional group transformations. For instance, the resulting carboxylic acid could be converted into 2-phenylpropan-1-ol in the presence of 1,1′-carbonyldiimidazole (CDI) derivative with NaBH 4 . Additionally, benzylation of the carboxylic acid provided the corresponding substituted ester derivatives. The reaction mechanism was investigated through controlled experiments, wherein the addition of 2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxyl (TEMPO) enabled trapping of the radical intermediate; the resulting adduct was confirmed by HRMS analysis.

Proposed mechanism is cathodic reduction of methyl (1-phenylethyl) oxalate 119a initially promotes C-O bond cleavage to generate a carbon-centered radical intermediate 119aa. Subsequent cathodic reduction of 119ab produces a carbanion species 119ac, which undergoes CO 2 insertion to furnish the desired carboxylic acid 120a.

Though the protocol was applied for the synthesis of carboxylic acid from the readily available primary, secondary alcohol derivatives but the effectiveness of tertiary alcohol to carboxylic acid is not discussed in the manuscript. The fate of the reaction of radical anion with another electrophiles ( e.g. HCHO, halogen, unsaturated ketone etc. ) remain unexplored in this observation.

Alcohols are a very common and important class of organic molecules with broad structural complexity that are found both in many natural and synthetic products, because of this it acts as an important feed stock for variety of transformations. Nevertheless, owing to the low reactivity and high bond dissociation energy, it is difficult to break polar C-O σ bond either hemolytic or heterolytic pathway. Conventionally, C-O bond cleavage done through stochiometric conversion of -OH group into better leaving group, followed by nucleophilic substitutions, reduction, or transition metal-catalyzed cross-coupling reactions. 113 Recently, catalytic deoxygenative transformations such as catalytic Mitsunobu reaction, radical transition metal catalysis, Tsuji-Trost type activation etc. of non-derivatized alcohols has gained significant interest. Although these catalytic pathways are frequently successful, but they are associated with some synthetic limitations, as ionic and radical pathways necessitate substrates that can stabilize the reactive intermediates, while dehydrogenative transformations and catalytic S N 2 -type processes are susceptible to steric hindrance. For case of transition metal catalytic reactions, toxic and expensive metals are used. To counter all these issues, a general and straight forward method is highly desirable from synthetic perspective. In this regard, electrochemical functionalization of organic molecules becomes a popular synthetic approach due to its underlying capability, selectivity as well as level of accuracy that is rare in organic chemistry.

In electrosynthesis, oxidative transformation is usually balanced by cathodic proton reduction and reductive transformation is balanced by different reductants including sacrificial metals anodes such as Mg, Al, Zn. Although these processes are user-friendly, but not suitable for large scale synthesis and flow electrolysis, because of the erosion at the anode and that causes of cell blockages and hence reduces the cell life. To counter this, many additives such as thioethers, phosphines, amines, thioureas etc. has been used in stichiometric amount as alternative. In this context, very recently Piret Villo and his research group have demonstrated electroreductive hydrodeoxygenation of benzylic and propargylic alcohols 121 into corresponding alkane 122, using inert carbon electrodes ( Scheme 27 ). 208 In this protocol, they employed sub-stoichiometric amounts of NaBH 4 as fuel for the anodic counter reaction. In addition, they also synthesized arylaceticacids 123 from non-derivatized alcohols and CO 2 via deoxygenative electro reductive C-C bond formation.

At the beginning, p -phenylbenzyl alcohol 121a was taken as a model substrate, the electroreductive reaction was carried out in an undivided cell using graphite (Cgr) electrode and NaBH 4 (0.3 equiv.) as additive. Molecular sieves were use to avoid hydrolysis of NaBH 4 , while anodic formation of H 2 was encompass by the continuous flow of N 2 . Following these conditions, 65% of the desired product alkane 122 was obtained after 3 hours of continuous current flow. On changing the additive from NaBH 4 to n Bu 4 NBH 4 (0.3 equiv.), resulted in quantitative yield of alkane 122 after 2 h of electrolysis. After initial screening, the reaction condition was standardized. With the optimized conditions in hand, next substrate scope and versatility of the methodology was evaluated. Different primary, secondary and tertiary benzylic alcohols are compatible with the methodology and produce corresponding alkane in good synthetic yield. Presence of electron releasing substituents such as alkyl (112g, 55%), methoxy (122d, 79%), phenoxy (122f, 53%) etc. in benzene ring, the electroreduction occurred efficiently and produced corresponding alkane moderate to good yield. On the contrary, acetal-protected diphenol or free phenol failed to deliver any product. Under the applied condition, substrates with basic heterocycles furnished moderate to good yield of the desired product. Benzylic substrates having electron withdrawing group like esters, nitriles etc. were well tolerated with this methodology, and afforded reduced product in good yields.

On the light of combined experiments and theoretical studies they proposed the deoxygenation mechanism ( Scheme 28 ). At the beginning, alcohol 121 undergoes cathodic single-electron reduction to produce a radical anion 121aa. Afterwards, anionic C-O bond cleavage takes place and a radical intermediate 121ac was formed, which on aromatization gives benzylic radical 121ad. A second electron abstraction results in the formation of benzylic carbanion 121ae, which upon subsequent H + abstraction furnish desired product alkene 122.Moreover, the carbanion121ae may react with CO 2 to produce aryl acetic acid 123. On the other hand, as anodic side reaction, borohydride is oxidized to H 2 and boron-based by-products.

The deoxygenative coupling was successfully carried out on the benzylic and propargylic alcohols, but fate reaction of simple aliphatic alcohols and phenols may provide promising result. Additionaly, deoxygenative carboxylation was tested on simple aryl alcohols, heteroaromatic alcohols may also undergo successful conversion which did not included in this article.

Alcohols are important and protean class of functional group, because of its versatile properties, selective cleavage of C-O bonds of alcohol derivative offered an efficient and promising methods for the construction of C(sp 3 )-C(sp 3 ) bonds. Conventionally, deoxygenative coupling reactions, transition metals catalytic reactions etc. have been used for formation of alcohol by reaction of alcohol derivatives with carbonyl groups. Despite the numerous advancements, report on deoxygenative coupling reaction involving aldehydes and more broad aliphatic alcohols are still uncommon. In this regard recently Hangyu Wang et al. 209 have demonstrated a highly effective electrochemical deoxygenative C(sp 3 )-C(sp 3 ) coupling of alcoholic phosphate derivatives 124 with aldehydes or ketones 125 to syntesise secondary alcohols 126 ( Scheme 28 ). Under mild and practical conditions, constant current electrolysis (CCE) was employed in an undivided cell without the use of transition metals or chemical reducing agents. Initially in the electrochemical reaction, alcohol derivative 124 (0.4 mmol), n Bu 4 NI (148 mg, 0.4 mmol), aldehyde or ketone 125 (1.6 mmol) were dissolved in dry solvent (THF: DMA = 3.5 mL: 0.5 mL) to an oven-dried undivided cell using carbon plate as cathode and stainless steel as anode. The reaction mixture then bubbled with N 2 for 10 min and electrolyzed under constant current of 20 mA at room temperature for 3.5-4.5 h. After completion of reaction, the solvent was evaporated in vacuum to obtain the desired product 126. After initial screening the reaction at different conditions, it was optimized and the best result was obtained by conducting the electrolysis for 4 h under a constant current of 20 mA in an undivided cell equipped with an SST (stainless steel) anode and a graphite cathode at room temperature in a mixed solvent of tetrahydrofuran (THF) and N , N -dimethyl acetamide (DMA). Under optimized reaction conditions further substrate scope was explored. A wide range of electron donating and electron withdrawing groups are compatible with this methodology, and provided desired products in very good yield. Further, a variety of phosphonate derivatives of benzylic (126a), propargylic alcohols (126j), and allylic (126k) were also reacted under standard reaction conditions. In this case it was observed that electronically poor groups showed better reactivity than that of electron rich and neutral substrates. This is probably because of electron-deficient alcoholic phosphates are easily reducible in addition higher stability of their carbanion intermediates. Based on previous reports and a branch of controlled experiments, they proposed possible mechanistic insight of the deoxygenative C(sp 3 )-C(sp 3 ) bond coupling reaction. Initially, cathodic reduction of alcoholic phosphate 124 gives a radical anion intermediate (124aa), which then undergoes C-O bond cleavage to produce free radical (124ab). Radical (124ab) then may undergoes SET to form anionic intermediate (124ac), this is on subsequent reaction with carbonyl group (125), following path-a to produce anionic intermediate (124ad). Finally, this on proton abstraction gives desired product 126. In another possible pathway (path-b), aldehyde 125 could reduce to form radical intermediate (125aa), which then undergoes coupling reaction with radical (124ab) to form anion 124ad which on final workup afford desired secondary alcohol 126.

Though author represented a successful deoxygenative coupling on primary and secondary alcohols, but reaction of phosphate with ester and acid chloride may lead interesting findings.

Alcohols are pervillege functionalities, widely found in organic molecules. Prevelence of alcohols make them a potential C(sp 3 ) coupling partner. However, owing to the high C-O bond dissociation energy and poor leaving aptitude of -OH group, they are rarely used directly as alkylating agents in cross-coupling reactions, but allylic and benzylic alcohols are only exception. Oxalates, tosylates, alkyl acetates, xanthate esters, mesylates, pivalates, phosphates, methyl ethers, and chloroformates etc. are few alcohol derivatives which was extensively studied in reductive cross coupling reaction, but the major drawbacks are (i) such derivative need to prepare from their corresponding alcohol precursor and (ii) their substrate scope is also low. Thus, developing a synthetic methodology using free alcohols (including π-activated alcohols and alkyl alcohols) as starting materials for the construction of C(sp 2 )-C(sp 3 ) bonds are highly desirable. 210 In this regard recently Zijian Li and his research group 211 have demonstrated a green, ecofriendly nickel catalyzed cathodic cross-electrophile reaction for direct arylation of readily available free alcohols. In the initial experiment, 4-phenyl-2-butanol (127a) and bromobenzene (128a) were choosen as model substrates, PPh 3 , and a chelated nickel catalyst was used in an undivided cell under electrochemical conditions ( Scheme 29 ). After initial screening, the process was optimized and the best result was obtained by carring out the reaction using 1 equiv. of alcohol 127a and 3 equiv. of bromobenzene 128a, 10 mol% of NiBr 2 , 20 mol% dtbbpy, 1.2 equiv. of DIPEA as base and NMP as solvent in an undivided cell equipped with carbon cathod and nikle anode, under 4 mA current electrolysis for 14 h at room temperature. After optimization of reaction conditions, further substrate scope was explored. Different alkyl primary and secondary alcohols containing varities of functional groups including ketone, ethers, carbamate, esters, pyridine, phthalimide, 1,4-dioxane, cyano, indane etc. are well tolerated. In addition, π-activated alcohols such as benzylic alcohols, allylic alcohol, and α-hydroxycarbonyl compounds are well accommodate and afforded desire product in good yields. Citronellol (129i), icaridin (129j), phytol (129k), and perillol (129l), and cortisone (129m) among other naturally occurring alcohols, were also compatible with the methodology and allowed to access the desired products in moderate to good yields.

Based on some controlled experiments and Weix's elegant demonstration of nickel-catalyzed reductive coupling reaction, 212 the mechanism of nickel-catalyzed cathodic reductive cross-coupling reaction was proposed. The in situ generated alkyl bromide (127ab) from alcohol 127 through anodic Appel reaction, was transferred to alkyl radical 127ac through single-electron transfer reduction by Ni( i ) complex 127ae, and itself converted to Ni( ii ) complex 127af. Subsequent cathodic reduction of Ni( ii ) complex 127af produced Ni(0) complex 127ag. Then oxidative addition of aryl bromide 128 to Ni(0), generated Ni( ii ) aryl complex 128aa. Further, Ni( ii ) aryl complex 128aa binded with alkyl radical 127ac to produce adduct 127ad, subsequent reductive elimination of adduct 127ae afforded desire product 129.

The intramolecular fashion of the -OH/-Br coupling under electrochemical condition may produce different cyclic analogue with great substrate scope.

DECARBONYLATIVE CROSS-COUPLING REACTIONS
Decarbonylative cross-coupling reactions are a powerful class of transition-metal-catalyzed transformations that enable the formation of new C-C and C-heteroatom bonds through the strategic extrusion of carbon monoxide (CO) from carbonyl-containing substrates. Typically employing acyl derivatives such as esters, amides, anhydrides, or acyl chlorides, these reactions proceed via oxidative addition into the acyl-carbon bond, followed by decarbonylation and subsequent coupling with a suitable nucleophilic or organometallic partner. By converting abundant and stable carboxylic acid derivatives into versatile electrophiles, decarbonylative cross-coupling offers an attractive alternative to traditional cross-coupling methods that rely on aryl halides. The development of efficient catalytic systems-often based on palladium or nickel has significantly expanded the synthetic utility of this strategy, enabling streamlined access to biaryl motifs, functionalized arenes, and complex molecular architectures in pharmaceutical, materials, and agrochemical research. In this regard, Rueping et al. 213 in 2018 highlighted advances made in transition-metal-catalyzed decarbonylative coupling reactions that enable diverse carbonyl functional group substitutions, including arylation, alkylation, olefination, alkynylation, cyanation, etherification, amination, silylation, borylation, thiolation, phosphination, stannylation, reduction, and retro -hydrocarbonylation. Szostak et al. 214 in 2018 documented a perspective review highlighting recent advances and key developments in the field of decarbonylative cross-coupling reactions of amides, emphasizing mechanistic insights, catalyst design, and expanding substrate scope. They also explored the remaining challenges such as improving reactivity, selectivity, and functional group tolerance and outline future directions and potential applications of this rapidly evolving and exciting area of synthetic methodology ( Fig. 12 ). In another report, same group in 2019 has highlighted the significant progress achieved in redox-neutral decarbonylative cross-coupling of acid chlorides, acid fluorides, and carboxylic acids emphasizing mechanistic insights, catalyst design, substrate scope, broader applications and challenges. 215 However, decarbonylative cross-coupling reactions under electrochemical conditions remain relatively rare; therefore, we have presented only one representative protocol that affords the desired product efficiently within this category.

The Diels-Alder reaction is one of the most powerful strategies for C-C bond formation and ring construction. Benzo[ c ]fluorenone derivatives have attracted considerable attention due to their applications as photocatalysts and organic functional materials; however, their limited synthetic accessibility necessitates further investigation. In a neutral Diels-Alder reaction, indanone undergoes cycloaddition over 35 days, followed by elimination of carbon monoxide. Subsequent chemical oxidation using superstoichiometric DDQ (2,3-dichloro-5,6-dicyano-1,4-benzoquinone) affords the desired benzo[ c ]fluorenone. In this transformation, two indenone units undergo a decarbonylative [4 + 2] cyclization, leading to the formation of benzo[ c ]fluorenone. However, the reaction rate increases upon heating the substrate at 130 °C, although isolation of the desired product remains challenging. Recently in 2025, K.-Y. Ye et al. demonstrated an efficient synthetic route to benzo[ c ]fluorenones 129′ via decarbonylative cycloaddition of indanone 128′, followed by photocatalytic electrochemical oxidative aromatization ( Scheme 30 ). 216 To establish the electrophotocatalysis (EPC) conditions, the reaction was optimized in an undivided cell equipped with a carbon cloth anode and a platinum plate cathode under irradiation with a 10 W blue LED (455 nm), using 7.5 mol% of the organic dye activator [Mes-Acr + ]ClO 4 (128″) as the photocatalyst. Under these conditions, benzo[ c ]fluorenones 129′ were obtained up to 70% yield. Notably, the desired product was not formed in the absence of either the photocatalyst or light. Consequently, the photocatalyst and reaction parameters were further optimized to achieve efficient EPC reactivity. Unfortunately, commonly used photocatalysts such as Ir(ppy) 3 and Ru(bpy) 3 did not improve the yield of the cyclized product, indicating that the organic dye [Mes-Acr + ] (128″) plays a crucial role under the electrophotocatalytic conditions. In addition, (2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidin-1-yl)oxyl (TEMPO) was found to be an essential additive for efficient electrolysis. Substituent variation studies revealed that indanones bearing electron-donating and mildly electron-withdrawing groups such as -Me (129′c), -OMe (129′d), -Cl (129′e), and -Br (129′f) were effectively converted into the desired decarbonylated products. However, substrates containing strongly electron-withdrawing groups such as cyano and nitro substituents exhibited poor reactivity, likely due to their higher oxidation potentials, which inhibit the initial oxidation step required for the transformation. Beyond indanone substrates, the authors also investigated benzo[ b ]thiophene sulfoxide and benzo[ b ]thiophene sulfone; however, these substrates failed to deliver the expected products under the standard reaction conditions.

A plausible mechanism for the electrophotocatalytic decarbonylative cyclization was proposed. Upon irradiation, the organic dye [Mes-Acr + ] 128″ is promoted to its excited state 128″a, which is oxidized to generate the radical cation 128′aa of indanone via single-electron transfer (SET). The resulting indanone radical cation 128′aa undergoes a [4 + 2] cycloaddition to afford the radical cationic Diels-Alder adduct 128′ab. Diels-Alder adduct 128′ab undergoes a decarbonylation to afford radical cationic 128′ac. Subsequent back-electron transfer from the acridinyl radical [Mes-Acr˙] 128″aa regenerates the photocatalyst [Mes-Acr + ] 128″ and furnishes the dihydro-benzo[ c ]fluorenone intermediate 128′ad. Finally, TEMPO-mediated electrochemical dehydrogenation leads to aromatization affording the desired benzo[ c ]fluorenone product 129′a.

This reaction pathway proceeds efficiently only with indanone derivatives; however, it does not operate with cyclopentadienone systems, indicating a clear limitation in substrate scope.

MISCELLANEOUS ELECTROCHEMICAL DEFUNCTIONALIZATIVE CROSS-COUPLING REACTIONS
In addition to deaminative, decarboxylative, decyanative, and deoxygenative strategies, a variety of miscellaneous electrochemical defunctionalizative cross-coupling reactions have been developed, further expanding the synthetic utility of electrochemical methods in organic synthesis. These transformations involve the electrochemical cleavage of diverse functional groups such as sulfones, amides, phosphonates, hydrazino, anilido, and nitro groups etc , generating reactive carbon-centered radicals or organometallic intermediates that engage in subsequent C-C or C-heteroatom bond-forming events. The use of electrochemical activation enables mild reaction conditions, precise control over redox processes, and the avoid use of stoichiometric oxidants or reductants. Recent progress, particularly through the integration of transition-metal catalysis (notably Ni, Cu, and Fe), redox mediators, and advanced electrochemical setups, has significantly improved reaction efficiency, selectivity, and substrate scope. 217 These miscellaneous defunctionalized cross-coupling reactions demonstrate broad functional-group tolerance and applicability to late-stage functionalization and complex molecule synthesis, underscoring the versatility of electrochemical approaches as green and scalable alternatives to traditional cross-coupling methodologies. In this regard, selected recent reports on miscellaneous electrochemical defunctionalized cross-couplings have been explored crtically underscoring effcieny, selectiveity, and mechanistic understanding.

The organofluorine compounds are more captivating owing to their unique biological and material properties. More specifically trifluoroactyl moiety stands out to be one of the most gifted fluorinated scaffolds prevalent in many bioactive molecules crucial in pharmaceuticals and other medical applications. 218 Though various methods of trifluoroacetylation have been documented, techniques for facile incorporation of trifluoroacetyl moiety employing trifluoroacetyl radical intermediate into the desired molecular scaffolds remained relatively underdeveloped. Recently, Li et al. in 2025 successfully developed a unique electrochemical strategy for smooth incorporation of trifuoroacetyl moiety into S , S- diarylsulfoximine ( Scheme 31 ). 219 They initially conducted the electrochemical decoxygenative cross-coupling reaction with S , S -diphenyl sulfoximine 130a and directly using trifluoroactetic acid 131 as trifuoroacetyl radical precursor. The reaction was performed in an undivided cell equipped with graphite anode and nickel cathode with 3.0 mA of constant current flow for 10 h at room temperature in presence of dry CH 3 CN containing n Bu 4 NPF 6 as supporting electrolyte, 2,6-lutidine as non-oxidizable base and 4 Å molecular sieves as dehydrating agent. Surprisingly, they got 92% of the desired trifluoroacetylated product 132a under reaction conditions. The controlled experiments showed necessity of constant electric current or PPh 3 for successful conversion to the desired products. And changing other parameters such as electrodes, solvents, supporting electrolyte, non-oxidisable base, and dehydrating agents resulted reduced products yields. Next, with their established optimal conditions, scope and widespread application of this unique electrochemical strategy has been investigated by synthesizing an array of N -trifluoroacetylated products 132. Thorough investigation showed the effectiveness of different arylated sulfoximine with both electron rich and deficient substituents on the arene rings at ortho -, meta -, or para -positions afforded the desired N -trifluoroacetylated products up to 95% yields. Naphthalene-substituted asymmetric sulfoximines with both electron rich and electron poor aryl ring efficiently delivered the desired N -trifluoroacetylated sulfoximines. Various S -aryl, S -alkyl sulfoximines were also well tolerated under this electrochemical cross-coupling reaction. Advantageously, this protocol was successful in trifluoroacetylation of S -heteroaryl and acetylation with perfluoroalkyl carboxylic acids providing the corresponding products in good to excellent isolated yields. Furthermore, this reaction was also efficiently extended to sulfonimidamides and drug based sulfoximines compounds which anticipated to exhibit great medicinal value. The feasibility and scalability of this protocol have been established by synthesising N- trifuloroacetyl substituted derivatives 132a in 82% (0.51 g) yields. To delve into the detailed mechanistic course of this electrochemical strategy authors conducted an extensive controlled experiments and based on that the course of the reaction was proposed to initiate via the anodic oxidation of PPh 3 resulting radical cation I which then generates the radical intermediate 131aa by combining with fluorinated carboxylic acids 131 via formation of strong P-O bond. Subsequently, β-scission of intermediate 131aa yielded the fluorinated acyl radical 131ab. On the other hand, N -centered radical 130ab is generated from the H-bonded complex 130aa of sulfoximines 130 and base via proton coupled electron transfer. Finally, combination of persistent N -centered radical 130ab and transient fluoroacyl radical 131ab resulted the desired product 132.

Although authors have developed an unique technique of electrochemical N -trifluoroacetylation, they have only explored this process in sulfoximines. It may have other promising applications which will enrich the chemistry literature.Inaddition, they also studied the reaction with aryl substituted sulfoximines, fate of the heteroaryl substituted sulfoximines under this reaction conditions have not included in this study.

Denitrogenative electrochemical cross-coupling reactions of aminoquinones represent a valuable strategy for the generation of synthetic building blocks toward polycyclic quinone-containing alkaloids, such as phenanthroviridin aglycon, jadamycins, and calothrixin B, which exhibit significant cytotoxic activity against tumor cells. 220

The arylation of quinones is most commonly achieved through palladium-catalyzed Suzuki or Stille coupling reactions. However, denitrogenative cross-coupling of quinones using aryl hydrazines remains relatively rare and underexplored. In 2025, S. Wang et al. reported the electrochemical synthesis of 2-aryl aminoquinones under oxidant- and transition-metal-free conditions using a constant current (5 mA) ( Scheme 32 ). 221 The reaction was carried out in an undivided cell equipped with carbon electrodes, employing n Bu 4 NBF 4 as the supporting electrolyte and acetonitrile as the solvent. The reaction conditions were optimized using 2-(propylamino)naphthalene-1,4-dione 133a and phenylhydrazine 134a as model substrates. Various solvents and electrolytes were screened to obtain the desired product 2-phenyl-3-(propylamino)naphthalene-1,4-dione 135a in the highest possible yield. The optimized conditions consisted of aminoquinone 133 (0.1 mmol), arylhydrazine 134 (0.3 mmol), n Bu 4 NBF 4 (0.2 mmol), Et 4 NOH (0.02 mmol), and acetonitrile (5 mL) in an undivided electrochemical cell at room temperature under a constant current of 5 mA for 4 h. Aminoquinones 133 bearing acyclic and cyclic secondary amines, including sterically hindered amines, furnished the corresponding arylated quinone products 135 in moderate to good yields. Notably, this protocol was also applicable to quinone substrates containing biologically relevant amine motifs such as amino acid esters, tyramine, and tryptamine. Furthermore, arylhydrazines possessing both electron-donating and electron-withdrawing substituents, including -Me (135d), -Br (135e), -CF 3 (135i), and -CN (135j), readily underwent arylation of the quinone system under the optimized conditions. Mechanistically, the electrochemical cross-coupling reaction was proposed to proceed via anodic oxidation of the arylhydrazine 134a, generating an iminium intermediate 134aa through a single-electron transfer (SET) process. A consecutive proton-coupled electron transfer (PCET) process generates the diazo radical 134ab, which readily undergoes denitrogenation to afford the phenyl radical 134ac. Radical addition of 134ac to aminoquinone 133a produces the α-amino carbon-centered radical 134ad. Subsequent single-electron transfer (SET) oxidation converts 134ad into the iminium intermediate 134ae. Finally, deprotonation of 134ae furnishes the arylated aminoquinone 135a ( Scheme 32 ). Cyclic voltammetry studies revealed that phenylhydrazine exhibits an oxidation potential of 0.5 V, whereas aminoquinone shows a significantly higher oxidation potential of 1.9 V, indicating that oxidative denitrogenation of the arylhydrazine is more favorable under the electrochemical reaction conditions. A radical trapping experiment performed in the presence of 2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidinyloxy (TEMPO) supported the involvement of a radical pathway in the reaction mechanism. Moreover, gram-scale experiments were successfully conducted, demonstrating the scalability of this denitrogenative cross-coupling protocol. The methodology was further extended to intramolecular cyclization reactions of the arylated products derived from benzamido and acetamidoquinone systems, using 1.5 equivalents of Tf 2 O and 3.0 equivalents of Ph 3 PO.

However, this methodology is limited to aminoquinone substrates for electrochemical arylation, and the reactivity of naphthoquinones or bromoquinones with arylhydrazines under electrochemical conditions remains unexplored.

Functionalization of imidazopyridines has attracted significant attention owing to their presence as key structural motifs in numerous bioactive and pharmaceutical compounds, including Zolpidem (sedative), Saripidem (anxiolytic), Alpidem (anxiolytic), and Zolimidine SCH28080 (H + /K + -ATPase inhibitor). Several protocols have been developed for the derivatization of this scaffold through the formation of C-C, C-N, C-S/Se, C-P, and C-Si bonds. However, electrochemical transformation, particularly C-3 alkoxycarbonylation of imidazoheterocycles, remains highly desirable due to its sustainability and synthetic efficiency. 222 In 2025, Zhang et al. has explored a Fe-catalyzed electrochemical deoxygenative alkoxycarbonylation of imidazoheterocycles 135′ with carbazates 135″ under affordable conditions ( Scheme 33 ). 223 The authors initiated their study using 2-phenylimidazo[1,2- a ]pyridine (135′a) as the model substrate and methyl hydrazinecarboxylate (136a) as the ester source. Under the optimized electrochemical conditions, C-3 alkoxycarbonylation proceeded smoothly to afford the desired functionalized product in 73% yield using a Pt plate as the cathode and carbon felt (CF) as the anode. Replacement of n Bu 4 NHSO 4 with n Bu 4 NPF 6 or n Bu 4 NClO 4 as the supporting electrolyte did not result in any significant improvement in yield. Similarly, changing the base from NaHCO 3 to Na 2 CO 3 or K 2 CO 3 also failed to enhance the product yield. Notably, the authors observed that PcFe acted as an effective electrocatalyst in the presence of both a base and a supporting electrolyte. Under the optimized reaction conditions, ester-functionalized imidazo[1,2- a ]pyridines 136 were efficiently obtained, particularly when electron-donating substituents (-Me and -OMe) were present at different positions on the pyridine ring. Electron-withdrawing groups on the phenyl ring, such as -Cl (136d) and -NO 2 (136h), were also well tolerated, affording the corresponding alkoxycarbonylation products in 45% and 54% yields, respectively. However, imidazo[1,2- a ]pyridines bearing strongly deactivating substituents such as -CN (136j) and -CO 2 Me (136k), as well as cyclopropyl-substituted analogues, were reluctant to undergo electrochemical alkoxycarbonylation under the optimized conditions. Notably, the methodology was further extended to other heteroaromatic scaffolds, including indole, benzofuran, quinoxalin-2(1 H )-one, and thiophene derivatives, although only moderate yields were achieved. This electrochemical functionalization was unsuccessful for substrates such as pyridine, pyrimidine, and coumarin derivatives. To gain mechanistic insight, 2,2,6,6-tetramethyl-1-piperidinyloxy (TEMPO) was employed as a radical scavenger, and the corresponding TEMPO-adduct was detected by HRMS analysis, confirming the involvement of a radical intermediate. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) studies revealed an oxidation wave at 0.35 V, which was attributed to the generation of an alkoxycarbonyl (methoxycarbonyl) radical from the carbazate reagent. Mechanistically, the introduction of the ester group can be rationalized by the coordination of carbazate 135″ to PcFe( ii ) followed by anodic oxidation to generate PcFe( iii )-135″, which facilitates N 2 extrusion from the resulting complex to form alkoxycarbonyl radical 135′a. Subsequently, the alkoxycarbonyl radical 135″a adds to the imidazo[1,2- a ]pyridine 135 scaffold, and further anodic oxidation delivers the desired C-3 alkoxycarbonylated product 136a. In this context, it is anticipated that a quinone-based substrate system under similar electrochemical conditions could potentially afford ester-substituted quinone derivatives upon reaction with carbazates.

Despite being an efficient electrochemical esterification method for imidazo moiety, it did not work for other heterocycles such as diazines, pyridines, or coumarins. Moreover, the reaction of acylchloride, acylsilanes as acyl radical precursors is unexplored.

The ongoing quest for new and efficient methods to synthesize aryl nitriles from readily available feedstock chemicals is driven by the widespread utility of aryl nitriles in organic synthesis and their ubiquitous presence in natural products, pharmaceuticals, and versatile functional materials. 224 Traditional approaches for accessing aryl nitriles include the Sandmeyer reaction of diazonium salts derived from anilines, the Rosenmund-von Braun reaction of haloarenes, and the oxidation or dehydrogenation of primary amines, among others. More recently, metal-catalyzed cyanation of diverse aryl electrophiles using various cyano sources has emerged as a powerful strategy. However, these methods often suffer from significant limitations, such as the requirement for hazardous cyanation reagents, transition metal catalysts, or harsh reaction conditions. In order to overcome the aforementioned difficulties, Chen and co-workers revealed an electrochemical method that uses the advantages of electro-synthesis to produce aryl nitriles 139 at room temperature through denitrative cyanation of nitroarenes 137 ( Scheme 34 ). 225 In order to determine the ideal conditions for the intended denitrative cyanation of nitroarenes, 4-nitrotoluene 137a was selected as the model substrate. Reacting 4-nitrotoluene 137a with cyanating agent t BuNC 138 in an 8 : 1 (v/v) CH 3 CN/MeOH mixture with [Mim]TolSO 3 (0.6 M) and tert -butyl nitrite ( t BuONO) at room temperature with a constant current of 5 mA produced 75% of the desired product 139a. Control tests showed that the undivided cell with graphite plates (C) as electrodes, electric current flow, t BuONO, and [Mim]TolSO 3 were all necessary for this transformation because without these no desirable product was produced. Several nitroarene substrates thoroughly examined under ideal circumstances, and the methodology demonstrated a wide range of functional group tolerance. Nitroarenes bearing simple alkyl, methoxy, phenyl, amide, acyl, ester, trifluoromethyl, chloro, and methylsulfonyl groups (139a-139i) as well as those containing a readily transformable bis(pinacolato)diboron substituent at the para -position of the phenyl ring were successfully converted into the corresponding products in moderate to good yields. In addition, substrates featuring a methoxy group at the sterically hindered ortho position, or a methyl, halogen, trifluoromethyl, or ester substituent at the meta -position, were well tolerated and furnished the desired aryl nitriles up to 78% yields. Fused arene - derived nitroarenes also displayed good reactivity, affording the corresponding nitriles in moderate yields. Moreover, the protocol exhibited excellent compatibility with heterocyclic nitroarenes containing quinoline, indazole, or benzofuran cores, providing the desired nitrile products in satisfactory yields. Advantageously, the reaction was readily scaled up to the gram scale, affording the product 139a in 75% yield (0.88 g) without any decrease in efficiency. To get deep insight of the reaction mechanism of the electrochemical denitrative cyanation process, they carried out cyclic voltammetry (CV) and other experiments. Following these experimental results, authors proposed a plausible reaction course initiated via cathodic reduction of nitroarene 137a to the corresponding 4-MeC 6 H 4 NH 2 137aa through the intermediacy of 4-MeC 6 H 4 NO 137a′. Then the reaction of 4-MeC 6 H 4 NH 2 137aa with t BuONO delivers the corresponding 4-MeC 6 H 4 N 2 + 137ab, which further reduces at the cathode to form key 4-methylphenyl radical 137ac. Radical 137ac then adds to t BuNC radical 138, forming key imidoyl radical 137ad, which finally give desired product 139a by direct elimination of tert -butyl radical.

Though authors successfully accomplished denitrative cyanation of nitroarene, but reaction of the nitroalkane under the identical electrochemical reaction condition has not been disclosed in this study.

The synthesis of α-arylalkylamines, which are crucial as pharmaceuticals and physiologically active substances, can be achieved easily by α-C-H arylation the alkylamines. The use of α-aminoalkyl radicals in α-C-H arylation of the alkylamines as key intermediates is highly attractive and reasonable owing to easy and regio -selective generation of these radicals from alkylamines either by α-hydrogen abstraction or via single-electron oxidation followed by deprotonation. In this regard, Yonekura et al. 226 has described a direct electrochemical α-arylation of alkylamines 140 with sulfonylarenes 141 using a homolytic aromatic substitution (HAS) pathway with α-aminoalkyl radicals produced by using sulfinate which is produced in situ as an oxidation mediator. Using a mixture of 141a (2 equiv), 142a, and sodium benzenesulfinate (PhSO 2 Na, 20 mol%) as a oxidation mediator and lithium perchlorate (LiClO 4 , 0.1 M) as a supporting electrolyte, 97% of desired (2-benzothiazolylmethyl)(cyclohexyl)(methyl)amine (142a) was obtained. The best result obtained when reaction was carried out in an undivided cell with a glassy carbon (GC) anode and a platinum (Pt) cathode by applying a constant cell voltage of 2.0 V in a MeCN/MeOH (3 : 1) solution ( Scheme 35 ). Interestingly even in the absence of PhSO 2 Na, the reaction proceeded to produce 143a with a 98% yield, probably amine 141a is immediately oxidized at anode early in the reaction rather than being oxidized by removal of the sulfinate. After getting success in the model study and standard reaction condition in hand, authors then examined the scope and general applicability of the designed procedure varying both the coupling partners. Benzoxazole and benzoimidazole derivatives reacted well with 142 to produce the corresponding α-arylation products 143 in high yields. The electrochemical α-arylation of alkylamines was aslo successfully applied to a variety of 2- (benzenesulfonyl) benzothiazoles, including those with a chloro (142b, 92%) or methoxy (142c, 90%) group at the 6-position providing good to excellent formation of the desired products 142b and 142c in 92% and 90% yields respectively. Gratifyingly, the reaction was successfully scale up to synthesise desired α-arylated alkylamines 142a in 87% yields (2.28 g) compared to batch reaction. Based on control experiments, the authors proposed a reaction mechanism initiated by the direct anodic oxidation of 140a at a glassy carbon (GC) electrode to generate the corresponding radical cation 140aa. The resulting radical cation 140aa undergoes deprotonation by another molecule of 140a to form the α-aminoalkyl radical 140ab. Homolytic aromatic substitution (HAS involving addition of 140ab to 141 (step c) followed by elimination of PhSO 2 ˙, affords the desired α-arylalkylamine 142a. The released RSO 2 ˙ subsequently oxidizes 140a to regenerate the radical cation 140aa and itself converted into PhSO 2 - These results suggest that a radical chain pathway is operative.

Though authors presented an efficient electrochemical protocol for the synthesis of α-arylated alkylamines using sulfonylarenes, reactions of alkyl sulfonyl and carbocyclicalkyl susbtrate as aryl radical precursors may provide promising results.

Transamidation is a cross-coupling reaction between two amide partners that proceeds through selective C-N bond cleavage, thereby eliminating multistep procedures and significantly reducing the need for activating reagents. Similarly, the transfer of alkyl groups from tertiary amines via selective C-N bond cleavage has emerged as a widely accepted strategy, achievable under transition-metal catalysis, photoinduced conditions, metal-free oxidative systems, photoelectrochemical methods, and electrooxidation-driven reactions. In 2024, H. Lin et al. reported a metal-free and oxidant-free electrochemical transamidation reaction employing twisted tertiary amides and readily available tertiary amines as coupling partners ( Scheme 36 ). 227 The reaction conditions were initiated using N -acyl imide (143a) and triethylamine (144a, TEA), affording the desired transamidation product 145a in 72% yield. The protocol was further optimized using Pt plates (1.5 × 1.5 cm) as both the anode and cathode in an undivided cell, with DCM (10 mL) as the solvent and water (20.0 equiv.) as an additive. n Bu 4 NBr was used as the supporting electrolyte and (NH 4 ) 2 SO 4 as an additive. Under constant-current electrolysis (6 mA) for 6 h, the desired amide derivatives were obtained in good yields. Variation of the electrode combination to C(+)/Pt(-) or Pt(+)/Fe(-) also enabled the transamidation reaction; however, no satisfactory improvement in yield was observed. Next protocol was examined for general applicability. N -Acyl imides bearing electron-donating substituents on the phenyl ring (-OMe, -OCF 3 , and -NMe 2 ) reacted smoothly with triethylamine to afford the corresponding amide derivatives, whereas a significant decrease in yield was observed for the 4-nitro-substituted imide derivative. Moreover, tri-isoamylamine (145m), tri-pentylamine (145l), and tri-hexylamine (145n) were successfully employed as alternative coupling partners, delivering the transamidation products in 78%, 77%, and 62% isolated yields, respectively. The methodology was also successfully extended to a gram-scale experiment, affording 0.425 g of the corresponding amide derivative 145a in 48% isolated yield without any significant loss of efficiency. The mechanistic pathway of this electrochemical transformation was elucidated through a series of controlled experiments. Notably, C-N bond cleavage was confirmed by the electrochemical conversion of tribenzylamine into dibenzylamine and benzaldehyde, obtained in 58% and 60% yields, respectively, in the absence of N -acyl imides. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) studies revealed two distinct oxidation waves at 1.29 V and 1.75 V. The first oxidation peak was attributed to the oxidation of Br - to Br 2 , whereas the second peak corresponds to the anodic oxidation of Br 3 - , generating additional Br 2 . After the electrochemical generation of Br 2 , it facilitates the oxidation of triethylamine 144, leading to the formation of an iminium ion 144b, which subsequently produces the corresponding secondary amine144c. This amine then undergoes nucleophilic addition to the N -acyl imide 143, affording the desired amide derivative 145.

Although the authors demonstrated the transamidation reaction using N -acyl imides and tertiary amines as coupling partners, the applicability of this protocol toward primary and secondary amides was not explored or discussed.

Electrochemical fluorosulfonylation via the elimination of thianthrenium salts represents a distinctive strategy for S-F bond formation, enabling the efficient synthesis of sulfonyl fluorides. These functional groups are highly valuable in click chemistry, particularly in sulfur( vi ) fluoride exchange (SuFEx) reactions. Consequently, the incorporation of -SO 2 F functionality into alkyl or aryl frameworks especially those bearing privileged moieties has found broad applications across synthetic chemistry, chemical biology, and related fields. 228 Various synthetic strategies have been developed for the preparation of sulfonyl fluoride motifs. These typically include: (i) direct S-F bond formation via fluorination of sulfur-containing substrates; (ii) construction of X-S bonds (X = C, O, or N) using diverse sulfonyl fluoride reagents, and (iii) tandem formation of C-S and S-F bonds through multicomponent (three-component) reactions. 229 Unfortunately, these aforementioned strategies often mandated with pre-functionalized substrates, exhibit narrow substrates scope, uses costly and toxic catalytic reagents which limit the wider applicability of these protocols. Therefore, more reliant, greener and sustainable approaches are in high demand. In this regard, Kong et al. in 2023 revealed a practical electrochemically driven method for the fluorosulfonylation of both aryl and alkyl thianthrenium salts (R-TT + OTf - , 146), eliminating the need for external redox reagents or metal catalysts ( Scheme 37 ). 230 When combined with C-H thianthrenation of aromatic compounds, this strategy offers a powerful and versatile tool for the site-selective introduction of fluorosulfonyl groups into drug molecules as well.

They initiated fluorosulfonylation reaction using p-tert -butyl phenyl thianthrenium salt as the model substrates 146a and DABSO 147 with KHF 2 as reagents. After careful screening various parameters, fluorosulfonylation product 149a was isolated in 82% yield while carrying out the reaction in an undivided cell using n BuNClO 4 as electrolyte in MeCN solvent under 8 mA of continuous current flow ( Scheme 37 ). Carbon as cathode and anode remained as the superior electrode for successful conversion to the desired fluorosulfonylated product. With the optimal reaction conditions authors then investigated the general scope and substrate compatibility of the designed method to synthesise diverse fluorosulfonylation compounds. They showed great efficiency of the newly devised protocol in synthesising fluorosulfonylated products with different thianthrenium salts carrying both electron rich as well as electron deficient groups attached at different positions in the aryl ring of the thianthrenium salts. Under the optimum reaction conditions, different substituted thianthrenium salts including fluoro, chloro, bromo, cyano, alkyl, phenyl, and alkoxy substituents at varied positions were capable of delivering the anticipated products up to 86% isolated yields. Fortunately, a series of heterocyclic thianthrenium salts including thienyl, carbazolyl, and dibenzo[ b , d ]furanyl provided the desired products up to 73% yields. Moreover, they successfully scaled up this protocol to synthesise 149a in 0.70 g (81%). Impressively, late stage fluorosulfonyation of natural product analogues 149h (42%) and 149i (80%) successfully achieved under standard reactions. After conducting thorough controlled experiments, authors proposed a reaction mechanism involving initial cathodic reduction of thianthrenium salts 146a to generate radical species 146aa. Then subsequent trapping of SO 2 by 146aa from 147 lead to the formation of 146ab. This sulfonyl radical 146ab then may combine with the radical cation B generated by anodic oxidation of DABCO (A) (Path-I) to form cationic species 146ac and subsequent fluorination finally provide the desired product 149a. Alternatively, radical 146ab may oxidise to sulfonyl cation 146ad in anode which then afford the final product 149a via nucleophilic fluorination (Path-II).

Though authors disclosed a simple electrochemical strategy for fluorosulfonylation, the specific preparation of alkyl/aryl thianthrenium salts are difficult. In contrary, they did not study fate of the reaction with other potassium salts which may provide different X-S (X = C, O, or N) bonds.

CRITICIZE AND LIMITATIONS OF ELECTROCHEMICAL SYNTHESES
Cross-coupling reactions are powerful strategies for C-C bond formation, however the requirement of specially designed substrates, transition-metal catalysts, and inert atmospheric conditions remains a major limitation of traditional protocols. In recent years, electrochemical approaches have emerged as attractive alternatives to overcome these drawbacks. Electrochemical process of forming chemical compounds within an electrochemical cell offers the significant advantage of eliminating wasted half-reactions while allowing precise control over the applied potential. This method enables redox-driven coupling reactions to construct new chemical bonds, including C-C and C-heteroatom linkages, thereby facilitating the assembly of diverse molecular scaffolds with promising applications. Moreover, electrochemical strategies are cost-effective, easy to operate, and avoid the use of hazardous reagents. Overall, the advantages of electrochemical synthesis, which utilizes electrical current to drive chemical transformations, include fine control over reaction parameters and the ability to perform reactions under mild, environmentally benign conditions ( Fig. 13 ). In this review, we have highlighted various electrochemical cross-coupling reactions involving the elimination of different functional groups, where the requisite coupling partners are subsequently incorporated into the substrates. Notably, this protocol eliminates the need for transition-metal catalysts, thereby avoiding catalyst separation from the reaction mixture and significantly reducing the overall cost associated with expensive catalytic systems. However, certain limitations still persist in this protocol, such as the need to select an appropriate electrolyte to avoid over-oxidation or over-reduction, which may lead to undesired side products. Moreover, scalability, electrode and electrolyte stability, and achieving high selectivity toward the desired products remain major challenges that often restrict the widespread application of electrochemical techniques. Although various methodologies have been discussed, their synthetic applications toward natural products and drug molecules remain very limited. Therefore, further efforts are required to expand the scope and utility of electrochemical defunctionalized cross-coupling reactions, and more extensive research is needed to establish their broader applicability in complex molecule synthesis.

OUTLOOK AND STATISTICAL OBSERVATIONS
The first electrochemical synthesis was attempted by Michael Faraday in 1830, when he sought to synthesize hydrocarbons via electrolysis of an acetate solution. This pioneering experiment laid the foundation for modern electro-organic synthesis, and the recent advancements in contemporary electro-catalysis have been made possible by these groundbreaking early works. 231 In the last few years, there has been an increasing trend in employing electro-catalytic organic transformations using various electrode-based undivided cells for the design, synthesis, and functional decoration of important organic molecules. These developments have attracted attention due to the greenness and sustainability of such protocols. Electrolysis-driven synthesis remained largely unexplored until recent decades, often because many substrates were considered too inert to undergo productive electrochemical transformations. Recently, overwhelming interest within the chemistry community has accelerated the use of electrochemical organic transformations in undivided cells for the construction of both simple and fused carbo- and heterocycles through these eco-friendly and sustainable approaches. Over the past decade, we have witnessed tremendous reliance on defunctionalizative cross-coupling reactions under electrolysis for the efficient and straightforward design and creation of new small molecular entities.

Electrochemical defunctionalized cross-coupling reactions including decarboxylative, dehalogenative, decyanative, deoxygenative, and deaminative cross-couplings have been widely employed in organic synthesis to build diverse molecular scaffolds. Among these, decarboxylative cross-coupling reactions, sixteen reports have been discussed where open-chain, carbo-cyclic, and heterocyclic carboxylic acids are participated in the defunctionalized cross coupling reaction by the extrution of CO 2 . This trend is evident from the growing number of publications in the last decade, highlighting substantial research contributions in this area ( Fig. 14 ). Less research effort has been devoted to defunctionalizative cross-coupling for decyanative and deaminative cross-coupling reactions accessing the desired small molecular motifs under electrocatalytic conditions, and this gap presents a significant opportunity for further exploration. Though the transition metal catalyzed decarbonylative cross-coupling reactions are largely explored but electrochemical patways is very limited in the current scenario. Denitro cross-coupling reactions also represent an unexplored and promising area for further development in electrochemical research. Among the six-membered N -heterocycles, quinazolinone has attracted considerable attention in recent years, surpassing quinoline and related heterocycles in research focus. Another relatively underexplored yet promising aspect of electro-catalytic transformations is selective defunctionalization, which can often be achieved with remarkable ease. This growing interest is reflected by the increasing number of publications in the past decade. Electrochemical protocols efficiently enable the formation of C-R, C-Ar, and C-S bonds via decarboxylative elimination of -CO 2 H, and similar defunctionalization strategies are also known in traditional cross-coupling reactions. Notably, the formation of C-B bonds via electrochemical strategy has emerged as a significant advancement in decarboxylative cross-coupling. In contrast, under dehalogenative conditions, electrochemical C-N bond formation remains limited, whereas it is readily achieved using conventional methods. Although deoxygenative electrochemical cross-coupling reactions have been widely explored, their traditional counterparts are comparatively scarce. Moreover, challenges associated with deaminative cross-coupling for -CO 2 H incorporation in traditional protocols have been effectively addressed through electrochemical approaches. While C-C bond formation has been well documented electrochemically, the construction of C-heteroatom bonds in such systems remains relatively underexplored. Electrochemistry thus emerges as a superior, sustainable, and environmentally friendly alternative to traditional protocols but research still needed to enormorous use as alternate. We are hopeful and confident that our current review will shed light on solutions to these challenging synthetic problems by employing electrochemical methods that operate under exceptionally mild and practical reaction conditions.

CONCLUSION
In conclusion, this article critically examines the various synthetic pathways and current trends in electro-catalytic defunctionalizative cross-coupling reactions for the synthesis of small molecular scaffolds. Decarboxylative, deaminative, dehalogenative, decyanative, and deoxygenative cross-coupling reactions have emerged as powerful strategies for the formation of C-C bonds through the introduction of aryl and heteroaryl groups, as well as alkyl and acyl functionalities. These electrochemical methodologies further enable the construction of diverse bonds, including C-B, C-N, and C-S linkages. Notably, the direct incorporation of carboxylic acids into heterocyclic frameworks has also gained significant attention in recent literature. This review critically highlights the limitations associated with these cross-coupling approaches. Each methodology is discussed in a chronological manner, emphasizing its significance, reaction optimization, substrate scope, control experiments, mechanistic insights, practical applications, and future prospects. This outlook observation would insist fresh researcher to carry out further research. By harnessing electro-redox chemistry to generate new chemical bonds, these greener synthetic approaches open up exciting possibilities for cost-effective and environment friendly chemical transformations. The use of readily available, energy-efficient electrochemical cells offers a promising pathway for enhancing the efficiency and sustainability of chemical synthesis. By exploiting the unique properties of various electrode materials in diverse redox reactions, researchers can explore innovative strategies for achieving targeted outcomes in organic transformations. This creative approach not only underscores the importance of harnessing natural resources to drive scientific progress in chemistry but also highlights the potential for improving and modernizing synthetic methodologies.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
There are no conflicts to declare.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The financial support from Science & Engineering Research Board (SERB TAR/2022/000070) is gratefully acknowledged. We are also thankful to Bidhannagar college for infrastructural facility.

BIOGRAPHIES
Dr Shubhendu Dhara did his bachelor and masters from Presidency College, University of Calcutta. He earned his Ph D in 2015 in organic synthesis under the supervision of Professor Jayanta Kumar Ray in Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, India. Then he moved to Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa-3200003, Israel for his post-doctoral research under the mentorship of Professor Charles E. Diesendruck. Since 2017 he is working as an Assistant Professor in the Department of Chemistry, Bhiarab Ganguly College, Kolkata, India. His current research interest is in the field of sustainable organic synthesis, developing new synthetic methodologies for important small molecules, CO 2 fixation to organic heterocyclic scaffolds. He has published more than 20 international journals.

Kushal Singh is a postgraduate student of Organic Chemistry at West Bengal State University, India. He completed his MSc in Organic Chemistry from Bidhannagar College (2023-2025) and earned his BSc (Honours) in Chemistry from Mrinalini Datta Mahavidyapith (2020-2023). His research interests include organic synthesis, reaction methodology development, mechanistically driven synthesis, and sustainable chemistry. He has research experience in the mechanochemical synthesis of bio-relevant C-fused pyrrole derivatives and is proficient in modern spectroscopic and chromatographic techniques. He qualified the GATE examination in Chemical Sciences (2025) and aims to pursue doctoral research in organic chemistry.

Jharna shee was born in Purba Medinipur, West Bengal, India. She obtained her BSc Degree in Chemistry (Hons) from Mahishadal Girls College under Vidyasagar University in 2023. She received her MSc Degree in Organic chemistry from Bidhannagar College under West Bengal State University and pursued her MSc project under supervision of Dr Shubhankar Samanta in 2025. Her research interests include Organic Synthesis with a focus on Green Methodology and Mechanochemical approaches for developing sustainable and environmentally benign chemical transformations.

Pradeepta Kumar Sahu studied chemistry (Hons.) at BCCST College, Bhubaneswar, under Utkal University in Odisha, India. He completed his MSc (Chemistry) degree in 2024 from C. V. Raman Global University. During MSc, he did his MSc project under the supervision of Dr Soumen Giri and Dr Subhankar Samanta (Bidhannagar College, Kolkata). Presently, his research interest is focused on organic synthesis.

Paritosh Barik was born in a Village named Basudebpur of the District Purba Medinipur, West Bengal, India. He obtained his BSc degree in Chemistry from Bidhannagar College in 2020. He then received his MSc degree in Organic Chemistry from the same Institute under West Bengal State University in 2022. He then worked as a project fellow under the guidance of Dr Shubhankar Samanta. Currently, he is pursuing his PhD under the supervision of Dr Shubhankar Samanta and Dr Mijanur Rahaman Molla since 2023 at the Department of Chemistry, University of Calcutta.

Mrs Maitreyee Panda was born (1994) in a village of Purba Medinipur, West Bengal, India. She obtained her BSc degree in Chemistry (Hons.) from Raja Narendra Lal Khan Women's College, Vidyasagar University in 2014. She also earned her MSc (Chemistry) degree in 2016 from Vidyasagar University, India. Currently she is pursuing her PhD degree in Synthetic Organic Chemistry under the joint supervision of Dr Shubhankar Samanta, Bidhannagar College, Kolkata, India and Dr Smritimoy Pramanik, University of Calcutta, Kolkata, India.

Dr Arabinda Mandal obtained his BSc degree in Chemistry from Jadavpur University, and MSc Degree from the same University. He did his PhD at Jadavpur University, Kolkata, India. He carried out his research work under the supervision of Dr Subrata Mukhopadhyay (Professor of Chemistry) at the department of Chemistry, Jadavpur University, Kolkata, India. Now his research is focused on Organic synthesis/methodology at the Department of Chemistry, Darjeeling Government College, Darjeeling, 734101, West Bengal, India. To date, he has published 24 papers in international journals.

Dr Mohammed Ikbal obtained his MSc degree in Organic Chemistry from Vidyasagar University, Midnapore. In 2013, he received his PhD degree in Organic Chemistry under the supervision of Prof. N. D. Pradeep Singh in the Department of Chemistry, IIT Kharagpur, and India. From September 2013 to January 2016, Dr Ikbal worked as a postdoctoral fellow at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel. Then he moves to KAUST, KSA to carry out his 2nd Postdoctoral research. Since, 2017 Dr Ikbal is working as an Assistant Professor in the Department of Chemistry, Berhampore Girls' College, and West Bengal, India. His research interests involve design and synthesis of photoresponsive fluorescent materials and photochromic compounds for fabrication of memristive devices. Visible light promoted synthesis. Synthesis of new type photoacid generators (PAGs) and photoresponsive polymers, design and development of organic fluorophores for biological applications.

Dr Shubhankar Samanta was born in Purba Medinipur, India in 1983. He received his MSc (Chemistry) degree in 2006, from Vidyasagar University, India. He earned his PhD in 2011 under the supervision of Professor Jayanta Kumar Ray in Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, India. He pursues his research in organic synthesis. Presently, he is working as an Associate Professor in Chemistry at Jhargram Raj College, Jhargram, India. Dr Samanta has published 47 international journals and he has completed four Governmental research projects till now. One collaborative SERB-TARE project is running with Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay. He has supervised four students for complete their PhD degree and three students currently pursuing their PhD work under his guidance.

DATA AVAILABILITY
No primary research results, software or code have been included and no new data were generated or analysed as part of this review.

ASSOCIATED DATA
No primary research results, software or code have been included and no new data were generated or analysed as part of this review.