ABSTRACT
Conspectus The renewed interest in electrochemistry in organic synthesis has
provided new opportunities for the development of novel and efficient
chemical transformations. In this context, ionic liquids (ILs) have
emerged as privileged media due to their peculiar properties, including
negligible vapor pressure, high coordination ability and thermal stability,
and a wide electrochemical window. Among them, imidazolium-based ILs
are of high interest since they can be used not only as solvent/supporting
electrolytes but also as electrochemical precursors for reactive species.
This Account discusses recent advances in the use of electroactive
imidazolium-based ILs in organic synthesis, focusing on the electrogeneration
of Lewis acids (LAs) and N-heterocyclic carbenes (NHCs). Key strategies
are discussed, with a critical discussion of the electrochemical behavior
and setups as well as their impact on reaction design and selectivity
as compared with conventional synthetic methods. Overall, this work
aims to provide a comprehensive overview of the emerging possibilities
that the combination of electrochemistry and ionic liquids provides
and to outline the possible future perspectives for their applications
in organic synthesis.

KEY REFERENCES
Bortolami , M. ; Magboo , F. J. P. ; Petrucci , R. ; Vetica , F. ; Zollo , G. ; Feroci , M. Electrogenerated
BF 3 From Tetrafluoroborate-Based Ionic
Liquids: Theoretical And Experimental Studies Towards Selective Styrene
Oxide Isomerization . J. Electrochem. Soc. 2021 , 168 ­( 11 ), 115501 10.1149/1945-7111/ac39e2 . This paper reports an experimental and theoretical study on the
stabilizing effect of the BMIm-BF 4 anion and cation on
electrogenerated BF 3 and puts in evidence the higher stability
of BF 3 in IL with respect to BF 3 etherate. Bortolami , M. ; Mattiello , L. ; Scarano , V. ; Vetica , F. ; Feroci , M. In Situ Anodically Oxidized BMIm-BF 4 :
A Safe and Recyclable BF 3 Source . J. Org. Chem. 2021 , 86 , 16151 - 16157 10.1021/acs.joc.1c00932 34213898 PMC8609525 . This paper demonstrates the efficiency of electrogenerated
BF 3 use in four classical Lewis acid-catalyzed organic
reactions, obtaining similar or improved yields as those obtained
using BF 3 etherate, with the possibility to efficiently
recycle the used IL. Rocco , D. ; Folgueiras-Amador , A. A. ; Brown , R. C. D. ; Feroci , M. First
example of organocatalysis by cathodic N -heterocyclic
carbene generation and accumulation using
a divided electrochemical flow cell . Beil.
J. Org. Chem. 2022 , 18 , 979 - 990 10.3762/bjoc.18.98 PMC9359202 35965857 . This work demonstrates the possibility to electrogenerate
and use NHCs under continuous flow conditions in a divided cell, with
the chance of IL recycling. A batch vs flow electrolysis comparison
is reported. David , M. ; Galli , E. ; Brown , R.
C. D. ; Feroci , M. ; Vetica , F. ; Bortolami , M. 1-Butyl-3-methylimidazolium
tetrafluoroborate as suitable solvent for BF3: the case of alkyne
hydration. Chemistry vs electrochemistry . Beil. J. Org. Chem. 2023 , 19 , 1966 - 1981 10.3762/bjoc.19.147 PMC10760484 38169890 . In this paper, a comparison
between the electrochemical and the conventional chemical approach
in BF 3 -catalyzed alkyne hydration in IL is reported. The
possibility of using BF 3 from less hazardous precursors
is demonstrated.

Bortolami , M. ; Magboo , F. J. P. ; Petrucci , R. ; Vetica , F. ; Zollo , G. ; Feroci , M. Electrogenerated
BF 3 From Tetrafluoroborate-Based Ionic
Liquids: Theoretical And Experimental Studies Towards Selective Styrene
Oxide Isomerization . J. Electrochem. Soc. 2021 , 168 ­( 11 ), 115501 10.1149/1945-7111/ac39e2 . This paper reports an experimental and theoretical study on the
stabilizing effect of the BMIm-BF 4 anion and cation on
electrogenerated BF 3 and puts in evidence the higher stability
of BF 3 in IL with respect to BF 3 etherate.

Bortolami , M. ; Mattiello , L. ; Scarano , V. ; Vetica , F. ; Feroci , M. In Situ Anodically Oxidized BMIm-BF 4 :
A Safe and Recyclable BF 3 Source . J. Org. Chem. 2021 , 86 , 16151 - 16157 10.1021/acs.joc.1c00932 34213898 PMC8609525 . This paper demonstrates the efficiency of electrogenerated
BF 3 use in four classical Lewis acid-catalyzed organic
reactions, obtaining similar or improved yields as those obtained
using BF 3 etherate, with the possibility to efficiently
recycle the used IL.

Rocco , D. ; Folgueiras-Amador , A. A. ; Brown , R. C. D. ; Feroci , M. First
example of organocatalysis by cathodic N -heterocyclic
carbene generation and accumulation using
a divided electrochemical flow cell . Beil.
J. Org. Chem. 2022 , 18 , 979 - 990 10.3762/bjoc.18.98 PMC9359202 35965857 . This work demonstrates the possibility to electrogenerate
and use NHCs under continuous flow conditions in a divided cell, with
the chance of IL recycling. A batch vs flow electrolysis comparison
is reported.

David , M. ; Galli , E. ; Brown , R.
C. D. ; Feroci , M. ; Vetica , F. ; Bortolami , M. 1-Butyl-3-methylimidazolium
tetrafluoroborate as suitable solvent for BF3: the case of alkyne
hydration. Chemistry vs electrochemistry . Beil. J. Org. Chem. 2023 , 19 , 1966 - 1981 10.3762/bjoc.19.147 PMC10760484 38169890 . In this paper, a comparison
between the electrochemical and the conventional chemical approach
in BF 3 -catalyzed alkyne hydration in IL is reported. The
possibility of using BF 3 from less hazardous precursors
is demonstrated.

INTRODUCTION
Electrochemistry
has recently re-emerged as a powerful and sustainable
tool in organic synthesis, offering unique opportunities to access
innovative reactivities and pathways that are often difficult to achieve
under conventional reaction conditions. By directly employing electrons
as reagents, electrochemical approaches enable precise control over
redox processes without the need for stoichiometric amounts of oxidants
and reductants. This renewed interest is driven by the increasing
demand for green and sustainable synthetic methodologies, paired with
technological advancements that made electrochemical setups available
and easily accessible. Hence, in the past decade, the scope and applicability
of electro-organic transformation have been radically broadened. -

In parallel, ionic liquids (ILs) have attracted the attention
of
the scientific community as alternative and sustainable solvent systems
in organic synthesis. - These compounds, typically composed of an organic
cation and different organic or inorganic counteranions, are characterized
by neglectable vapor pressure, high thermal stability, enhanced solvation
properties (specifically for ionic intermediates), and wide electrochemical
windows. Moreover, their properties are easily tunable, affecting
polarity, viscosity, and coordinating ability, thus making them particularly
attractive as versatile reaction environments.

The combination of ionic liquids and electrochemistry
represents
a promising platform to achieve novel, efficient, and sustainable
synthetic methods. In fact, the ionic nature of ILs paired with wide
electrochemical windows makes them excellent solvents for electrochemical
transformations, since ILs themselves can serve as both solvents and
supporting electrolytes, hence reducing chemical waste and avoiding
the use of additional salts to guarantee conductivity. Within this context, imidazolium-based ionic
liquids have been widely studied in electro-organic synthesis, not
only as reaction media but also as reactive intermediate precursors.
Their intrinsic reactivity under electrochemical conditions can be
effectively harnessed for catalytic transformations. Notably, these
ionic-liquid-derived active species can be generated prior to the
catalytic step, while the highly coordinating environment provides
their efficient stabilization, allowing their subsequent use in a
controlled manner. This strategy minimizes undesired electrochemical
side reactions and provides accurate regulation of both reactivity
and selectivity.

In this Account, we describe the applications
of electroactive
imidazolium-based ionic liquids as solvents, supporting electrolytes,
and reactive species precursors in organic synthesis. Specifically,
the possibility to electrogenerate Lewis acids (LAs) or N -heterocyclic carbenes (NHCs) starting from these ILs is discussed,
focusing on their electrochemical behavior and the electrochemical
setups and reaction conditions and how these influence the synthetic
outcomes of the methodologies.

ELECTROACTIVE IONIC LIQUIDS AS LEWIS ACID
PRECURSORS
The electrochemical generation of Lewis acids
(LAs) in conventional
organic media represents a powerful strategy to access reactive species
under mild conditions. This approach typically relies on anodic dissolution
or oxidation processes that generate metal cations or electrophilic
intermediates ( Figure a). Electrogenerated Lewis acids (EGLA) can then be used as catalysts
to promote organic transformations. A representative example is the
indirect electrogeneration of BF 3 from tetrafluoroborate
(BF 4 - ). In
this system, anodic oxidation of a titanium electrode, using methanol
as solvent, produces Ti 4+ species. By employing an undivided
cell configuration and in the presence of NaBF 4 as a supporting
electrolyte, Ti 4+ ions can abstract fluoride anions from
BF 4 - to generate BF 3 . The
resulting LA is immediately exploited in situ to promote the esterification
between methanol and formic acid (the latter obtained via concurrent
electrochemical CO 2 reduction), affording methyl formate
in an integrated electrochemical process. This electrochemical system
allowed for the efficient production of methyl formate with a high
faradaic efficiency of 69%, observed at a current density of 5.3 mA
cm -2 . This example highlights the ability of electrochemical
methods to couple catalyst generation and substrate transformation
within a single setup, thereby avoiding the direct handling of corrosive
BF 3 . In a similar approach, Wen, Guo, and co-workers reported
the anodic oxidation of aluminum electrodes, leading to the formation
of Al 3+ species, which in the presence of chloride ions
generate AlCl 3 . This EGLA efficiently promotes the reduction
of sulfoxides to sulfides under relatively mild conditions, even up
to the multigram scale. The use of sacrificial
electrodes thus provides a convenient route to classical Lewis acids
without requiring their external addition.

(a) Electrogeneration
of LAs or (b) the use of LAs in ILs.

More recent developments have expanded this concept to non-metal-centered
LAs. For instance, the anodic oxidation of tetrakis­(penta­fluorophenyl)­borate
leads to the formation of highly electrophilic boron species capable
of promoting defluorination reactions. Akiba et al. demonstrated the synthetic applicability of this approach,
leveraging the reactivity of a naked boron LA species, for defluorinative
cross-coupling and alkene metathesis reactions. In a divided cell
setup and upon electrochemical treatment, the authors could verify
by NMR analyses the formation of bis­(perfluoro­phenyl)­borane
as an active Lewis acid.

Afterward, similar EGLA acids have
been successfully applied in
Claisen rearrangements, demonstrating the versatility of this approach
in complex bond-forming reactions. The
authors performed a detailed study of the electrogeneration of LA
using a mixture of MeOH and DCM as the solvent. 1 H and 11 B NMR analyses of the anolyte solution highlighted the formation
of MeOH-derived boron adducts, specifically B­(C 6 F 5 ) 3 , B­(OMe)­(C 6 F 5 ) 2 , and
B­(OMe) 2 (C 6 F 5 ). The formation of boron-solvent
adducts decreases the Lewis acidity of the system, which, however,
can be employed to tune the reactivity of highly reactive substrates,
suppressing the formation of side products. In fact, the intended
Claisen rearrangement reported by the authors required extremely short
reaction times (from 1 to 6 min) using DCM/MeOH as a solvent.

Overall, these examples underline the key advantages of LA electrogeneration
in organic solvents: (i) temporal control over Lewis acid formation,
(ii) avoidance of stoichiometric reagents, and (iii) compatibility
with tandem or cascade processes.

In contrast to electrogeneration
strategies, ionic liquids (ILs)
have also been employed as noninnocent solvents capable of stabilizing
and enhancing the activity of classical LAs. The unique solvation
environment provided by ILs enables the formation of stable Lewis
acid-anion complexes, often leading to improved catalytic performance
( Figure b).

A seminal example is the use of chloroaluminate ILs, such as BMIm-Cl/AlCl 3 systems, for the synthesis of 4-chlorotetrahydropyrans. In this system, the ionic liquid not only serves
as a solvent but also participates in the formation of active LA species
through equilibria between AlCl 3 and chloride ions. Similarly,
the Biginelli reaction has been efficiently performed in ionic liquids
in the presence of Lewis acids such as CuCl 2 . The IL environment stabilizes charged intermediates
and facilitates multicomponent condensation reactions, often leading
to improved yields and selectivities compared to those of conventional
solvents. More recently, ionic liquids have also been employed in
polymerization reactions, such as the FeCl 3 -catalyzed polymerization
of β-pinene.

A major conceptual
advance in this field is the use of ionic liquids
not only as solvents but also as intrinsic precursors for the electrogeneration
of Lewis acids, leading to integrated solvent-catalyst systems
and thus combining the advantages of the two approaches just discussed.
This strategy is exemplified by tetrafluoroborate-based imidazolium
ionic liquids (e.g., BMIm-BF 4 ), as shown in Figure . In the first key study, anodic
oxidation of the BF 4 - anion in BMIm-BF 4 leads to the controlled formation of BF 3 directly
within the ionic liquid medium. This process
generates a pre-electrolyzed anolyte containing a defined amount of
BF 3 (precisely tuned by the passing electric current),
which can then be used as a catalytic system. Moreover, the intrinsic
ionic nature of the solvent allows the avoidance of an additional
supporting electrolyte, reducing waste and increasing the atom economy
of the synthetic procedure. This methodology was successfully applied
to a variety of transformations, including Friedel-Crafts/lactonization
domino reactions, multicomponent condensations, Povarov reactions,
and electrophilic aromatic substitutions. In many cases, the performance
of the electrogenerated BF 3 in ILs was comparable or superior
to conventional Lewis acids (e.g., TiCl 4 , BF 3 ·Et 2 O) while offering advantages in terms of safety,
recyclability, and operational simplicity ( Figure a-d, domino Friedel-Crafts
lactonizations, Povarov reaction, Friedel-Crafts benzylation,
and multicomponent reactions). For instance, the case of the Povarov
reaction ( Figure b),
the classical chemical approach using etherate-BF 3 led
to only a 15% product yield, while applying the developed procedure
dramatically increased the outcome to 96% yield. A key feature of
this approach is also the recyclability of the ionic liquid, which
can be reused after electrolysis, making the system attractive from
a green chemistry perspective.

Electrogeneration of BF 3 . Literature
data: (a) domino
Friedel-Crafts lactonizations, (b) Povarov reaction, (c) Friedel-Crafts
benzylation, and (d) multicomponent reaction.

Subsequent theoretical
and experimental investigations provided
deeper insight into the nature of the active species generated in
these systems. The reactivity of these
electrogenerated systems was evaluated through the isomerization of
styrene oxide ( 14 ), which served as a model reaction.
Notably, the reaction outcome was strongly influenced by electrochemical
conditions (divided vs undivided cells), highlighting the importance
of controlling the speciation of active intermediates ( Figure ). As illustrated in Figure , the electrogeneration
of BF 3 in imidazolium-based ILs is accompanied by the formation
of N -heterocyclic carbene (NHC) species, arising
from cathodic processes. Within an undivided electrochemical cell
setup, these NHCs can interact with BF 3 to form adducts
(NHC·BF 3 , Figure a, whose presence has been put in evidence by 19 F NMR), which may serve as reservoirs or modulators of Lewis
acidity. In fact, under these reaction conditions, the only reaction
product formed was corresponding aldehyde 15 . Instead,
if a divided cell setup was employed, dioxolane species 16 was obtained in 91% yield. The reason behind this difference in
reactivity was explained via theoretical calculations. In fact, equilibria
involving BF 3 and BF 4 - can
lead to species such as B 2 F 7 - ( Figure b), which
is formed predominantly in a divided electrochemical cell system,
as supported by theoretical calculations. Additionally, the presence
of BMIm + further stabilizes the BF 3 adduct,
compared to the classic Et 2 O complex, without hindering
its reactivity as the NHC. Hence, by simply switching the experimental
setup, a divergent synthetic outcome can be achieved, in both cases
ensuring a safer handling system compared to commercial BF 3 ·Et 2 O. Finally, the structure of the IL cation was
evaluated, leading to comparable excellent yields (up to 92%). These
results demonstrate the promisingly broad applicability of different
IL systems in various synthetic methods by replacing the ionic liquid
imidazolium cation depending on the needed solvent properties (viscosity,
solvation properties, and solubility of substrates) without interfering
with LA electrogeneration. This study emphasizes that ionic liquids
are not merely passive media but dynamic environments where multiple
reactive species coexist, influencing both activity and selectivity.

Styrene
oxide isomerization via electrogenerated Lewis acids (EGLA):
(a) formation of the NHC·BF 3 adduct in undivided cells
and (b) predominant formation of B 2 F 7 - in divided cells.

Subsequently, another
key contribution was reported, focusing on
comparing the role of ionic liquids as (i) simple solvents for externally
added BF 3 and (ii) electroactive media capable of generating
BF 3 in situ as well as solvent and supporting electrolyte. Using the hydration of alkynes as a benchmark
reaction ( Figure ),
it was demonstrated that both approaches can deliver comparable yields
(47-97% vs 51-94%, respectively). However, the electrochemical
approach offers several advantages: (i) elimination of hazardous BF 3 handling; (ii) tunable generation of the active species;
and (iii) integration of solvent, catalyst, and supporting electrolyte
in a single system.

Hydration of alkynes: EGLA vs LA.

The evolution from classical Lewis acid chemistry in organic solvents
to electrochemically driven systems in ionic liquids illustrates a
clear trend toward more sustainable, controllable, and integrated
catalytic platforms. Electrogeneration enables the on-demand formation
of highly reactive species, while ionic liquids provide a unique environment
that can stabilize, modulate, and even generate Lewis acids.

In particular, imidazolium-based ILs emerge as versatile electroactive
media capable of bridging the gap between solvent and catalyst. The
combination of electrochemistry and ionic liquids thus opens new avenues
for designing greener and more efficient synthetic methodologies with
fine control over reactivity and selectivity.

ELECTROACTIVE IONIC LIQUIDS
AS NHC PRECURSORS
Azolium cations are electroactive species:
depending on their structure,
they can be reduced at the cathode. When considering 1,3-disubstituted
imidazolium cations, the reductive scission of the activated C-H
bond (between the two nitrogen atoms) forms the corresponding N -heterocyclic carbene (NHC), whose fate depends on the
reaction partners and solvent.

This NHC (nucleophilic and basic) is usually highly reactive and
unstable, rendering its isolation and characterization difficult.
In classical organic chemistry, the formation of NHC from imidazolium
salts is obtained by deprotonation with a strong base.

The presence
of an NHC in an electrolyte can be put into evidence
by voltammetric measurements from the corresponding oxidation peak.

The cyclic voltammetry (CV) of a solution
of a 1,3-disubstituted
imidazolium salt shows in the forward cathodic scan a reduction peak
at a potential dependent on the imidazolium structure, corresponding
to the reductive C-H cleavage, followed by the presence of
one or two anodic peaks on the reverse anodic scan. The voltammetric
behavior of 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate (BMIm-BF 4 , one of the most used imidazolium salts) on a glassy carbon
electrode is very similar in DMF and neat ( Figure a and b, respectively); in
both cases, the electrogenerated NHC presence is supported by the
appearance of the anodic peak. A comparison between the anodic voltammetric
behavior of BMIm-BF 4 containing NHC (obtained by deprotonation
with DBU, Figure c)
and of electrolyzed BMIm-BF 4 ( Figure d) demonstrated the presence of NHC after
cathodic reduction of the IL.

Voltammetric
behavior of BMIm-BF 4 on GC WE (a) in DMF
and (b) neat. (c) Chemical and (d) electrochemical generation of NHC
on Pt WE. (e) Proposed radical pathway on Au WE, adapted with permission
from ref . Copyright
2018 Elsevier. CV data adapted with permission from (a) ref , copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH;
(b) ref , copyright
2013 Elsevier; and (c, d) ref , copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH.

This behavior was first reported by Fuller and Carlin more than
three decades ago in a THF solution of
1,3-bis­(4-methylphenyl)­imidazolium chloride. The authors did
not attempt an interpretation of the CV, reporting that “the
two oxidation waves seen during the reverse scan correspond to the
generation of one or two electroactive species by the reduction process”.

More recently, Buess-Herman and co-workers verified, by NMR, the
fate of NHCs electrogenerated on a gold electrode. Mostly dimeric
products were obtained, along with reduced NHCs ( Figure e). ,

These products are suggested to originate mainly from a radical
pathway, supported also by theoretical calculations. This radical pathway is in contrast with our results ( vide infra ) and with the electrosynthesis of imidazolium
carboxylates by the reaction of electrogenerated NHC with CO 2 . , , , Nonetheless, the different working electrodes (gold
vs platinum) could explain the difference in behavior. In addition,
Türkmen, Suzer, and co-workers were able to electrogenerate
NHC in the XPS analysis chamber, giving direct spectroscopic evidence
of NHC formation.

The same behavior
is found in dicationic ILs in which two imidazolium
cations are linked by a spacer. The cathodic
reduction of such species can yield a mono- or a di-NHC (actually
both are obtained) whose molar ratio depends on the spacer nature
(aliphatic or aromatic) and length ( Figure a). Anyhow, it is possible to obtain NHCs
following the same experimental procedure for monocationic imidazolium
salts.

(a) Electrochemical behavior of dicationic
ILs; (b) counteranion
effect - generation of NHC via deprotonation by the acetate
anion; and (c) BMIm + and BDMIm + electrochemical
reduction and their reactivity toward aldehydes. CV data adapted with
permission from ref . Copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry.

The possibility to obtain NHC in IL without electrochemistry or
strong bases was demonstrated by Nyulászi when studying the
behavior of BMIm-Ac (1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium acetate), which they
called “an organocatalytic ionic liquid”. In fact, the acetate ion basicity is sufficient
to deprotonate to a low extent the imidazolium cation, generating
small amounts of NHC able to catalyze the benzoin condensation. The
voltammetric analysis again proves applicable for NHC presence determination
in acetate IL. Despite the fact that the amount of NHC in BMIm-Ac
at r.t. is so low that no oxidation current is seen in CV, when the temperature reaches 120 °C, an
oxidation peak appears in the CV of pure BMIm-Ac, in contrast with the behavior of an imidazolium salt with
a nonbasic counterion (BMIm-Cl) ( Figure b).

Imidazolium cations are electroactive
also if the 2-position is
substituted by a methyl group. In this case, the cathodic event does
not involve a ring carbon atom but rather the Cα-H bond. Consequently,
an olefin is obtained, which is called NHO ( N -heterocyclic
olefin). Contrary to what happens with
NHCs, an NHO has the highest electron density on the carbon outside
the ring, which is the nucleophilic position. The addition of an NHO
to the carbonyl of benzaldehyde is thus irreversible, yielding a stable
adduct which does not evolve toward the release of NHO. As a consequence,
NHO cannot be used as nucleophilic organocatalysts ( Figure c).

Since NHC stability
in solution strongly affects its catalytic
ability, again voltammetric analyses can give evidence of the persistence
of an NHC in solution. In fact, the electrochemical methodology generates
NHCs only during the current flow, while classical chemical deprotonation
continues to generate NHC until the complete consumption of the added
base (usually present in a large excess). Our voltammetric studies
demonstrated that the half-life of an electrogenerated carbene depends
not only on the salt structure but also
on the solvent and reaction partners.

In particular, the ability of ILs to establish
hydrogen bonds with
NHCs stabilizes such species in pure ILs with respect to most organic
solvents (e.g., DMF). , Such experimental results were
also supported by theoretical calculations.

It is thus clear that NHC can be obtained from an imidazolium
salt
by cathodic deprotonation, despite the influence of the cathode nature
(e . g., gold or platinum) on the imidazolium reduction
pathway (yielding a radical or a carbene). This methodology is competitive
with chemical deprotonation with two important advantages: first,
the amount of electrogenerated carbene can be exactly controlled by
the charge transferred to the imidazolium cation (i.e., NHC generation
can be initiated or stopped by simply supplying or interrupting the
current flow). This avoids the addition of bases and the generation
of associated byproducts. The second advantage is that the use of
a pure IL as an electrolyte not only circumvents the addition of a
supporting electrolyte (one of the main criticisms to the electrochemical
methodology in place of traditional chemical ones) but also enhances
the stability of NHCs. The possibility of carrying out NHC generation
in a divided electrochemical flow cell expands the advantages. In
this way, a higher rate of NHC generation is possible with respect
to batch electrochemistry, which is particularly significant in view
of a possible process scale-up.

It is our opinion that a deeper spectroscopic study would be beneficial
in order to shed light on the anodic oxidation of NHCs, in which one
or two current peaks are present, to define the products and possibly
exploit such redox reactivity (which seems most probably not accessible
by classical chemical means).

ELECTROGENERATED NHCS: ORGANOCATALYSIS IN IONIC LIQUIDS
ILs are seldom considered good solvents for organocatalysis, including
enantioselective methods. This is probably due to the fact that highly
polar solvents could interfere with active catalytic intermediates.
Nonetheless, there are some advantages in using ILs in catalysis:
(a) water-sensitive catalysts are less sensitive to water in ILs due
to the strong interactions between water and IL; (b) ILs stabilize
polar transition states; (c) IL hydrogen bond acidity can influence
reagents nucleophilicity, possibly enhancing selectivity; and (d)
consequently, the selectivity and reaction rate can be different in
ILs than in volatile organic solvents (VOCs). There are few literature reports concerning organocatalysis in ILs,
one example being the enantioselective aldol reaction, successfully
carried out in BMIm-BF 4 by Jiang, obtaining high enantiomeric
excesses (91 to 99% ee) in the reaction of both aromatic and aliphatic
aldehydes with acetone with the use of an l -prolinamide derivative
organocatalyst. Proline-derived organocatalysts
are the preferred ones when using ILs as solvents, as reviewed by
Zlotin, Šebesta, and Santos.

With regard
to imidazole-NHC in ILs, literature reports focus nearly
exclusively on metal-NHC complexes in ILs (e.g., NHC-Pd-catalyzed
oxyarylation of alkynes in imidazolium salts ) despite a few examples of the chemical generation of carbenes in
ILs being reported. - Although not explicitly cited in the relevant papers,
each time that a base is used in an imidazolium IL, the intervention
of the corresponding NHC cannot be ruled out. Most of the literature on the use of NHC in ILs deals with electrogenerated
NHCs and their use as organocatalysts or bases, while their use as
ligands in metal complexes is reported in VOCs. The different behavior of electrogenerated NHCs in ILs
and VOCs, which is mainly due to the IL stabilization of polar compounds
or intermediates, has been recently reviewed and is thus not covered
here.

The importance of NHCs as
organocatalysts stems from their ability
to give umpolung in carbonyl compounds (i.e., invert the carbonyl
polarity) in which the carbon atom turns from electrophilic to nucleophilic
(yielding the Breslow intermediate). - This well-known chemistry is
generally carried out in VOCs, using an excess of base to ensure the
NHC’s continuous presence (by azolium salt deprotonation).
When carrying out the electrogeneration of NHC in imidazolium ILs,
the amount of NHC is easily controlled by switching the current flow
on/off (without any added base and relative byproducts), and the NHC’s
lifetime is usually enhanced (with respect to VOCs) due to the stabilization
effect of ILs ( vide supra ). Moreover, ILs can stabilize
polar intermediates, rendering this organocatalysis highly efficient.
The first and most famous NHC-catalyzed reactions is the benzoin condensation,
in which two molecules of benzaldehyde react to yield benzoin (2-hydroxy-1,2-diphenylethan-1-one, Figure a, blue product).
When carried out by electrochemistry in BMIm-BF 4 , the reaction
is efficient with a very broad scope and the catholyte (used IL in
the cathodic compartment) can be recovered and recycled for subsequent
runs, accentuating the sustainability profile of the strategy. , In the presence of an alkylating agent and oxidant, electrogenerated
NHC and benzaldehyde give an oxidative esterification ( Figure a, red product). In this reaction,
the NHC-aldehyde adduct (before the proton shift leading to the Breslow
intermediate) is O-alkylated. Subsequent deprotonation and oxidation
yield the corresponding ester.

Organocatalytic
synthetic applications of NHCs for oxidative transformations
of (a) benzaldehyde derivatives or (b) cinnamaldehyde derivatives.

If the aldehyde has a conjugated CC double
bond (cinnamaldehyde
derivatives, Figure b), then NHC reacts through a direct nucleophilic addition to the
carbonyl group, finally evolving, in the presence of an alcohol or
an amine, to the saturated ester or amide, respectively ( Figure b, red product).

In the absence of
any other reactant, cinnamaldehyde can dimerize
to yield a γ-butyrolactone which still contains one of the two
native double bonds, while in the presence of 2,2,2-trifluoromethyl­acetophenone
the reaction yields a CF 3 -containing γ-butyrolactone
( Figure b, blue products).
In all cases, the catholyte could be recovered and reused up to 10
times, with only a moderate yield loss.

The reaction of NHC, imine, and acid chloride yields a β-lactam
via a Staudinger 2 + 2 reaction ( Figure a), in which NHC is a nucleophilic catalyst,
activating the imine nitrogen atom. The stereochemical outcome is
a cis / trans β-lactam mixture,
with a predominantly trans isomer (up to 9/91 cis / trans ). , β-Lactams
can also be obtained in ILs with NHCs as bases, starting from a bromoamide.
If a C3-C4 bond formation pathway is considered ( Figure b), then a 2-bromoamide with
suitable C-H acidity must be used (e.g., a malonate C-H
group) to obtain an efficient deprotonation. On the other hand, when considering an N-C4 bond formation
pathway, a 3-bromoamide is needed. In this case, two acidic positions
are present, N-H and C2-H ( Figure c), yielding a mixture of β-lactam
and acrylanilide. When using NHC in IL as a base, a nearly 1:1 mixture
of products is obtained, while when using a stronger electrogenerated
base (DMF anion, obtained by deprotonation acted on by the product
of the cathodic reduction of tetraalkylammonium cations) the selective
formation of β-lactam is obtained. Besides the solvent effect (BMIm-BF 4 vs DMF), the high
base strength difference is decisive. In fact, the BMIm + cation p K a value is around 22, while
the DMF one is around 27.

Synthesis of β-lactams via NHC catalysis:
(a) the Staudinger
reaction, (b) 2-bromoamide cyclization, and (c) selectivity in β-lactam
formation with electrogenerated bases.

These examples show that NHC electrogeneration in ILs can be an
efficient method to promote organocatalytic reactions. Moreover, the
fact that electrochemistry allows us to avoid bases and related byproduct
formation and the possibility to recover the catholyte and reuse it
in subsequent runs (up to 10) are certainly bright sides from the
perspective of green chemistry.

NHCs’ basic and nucleophilic
character could create a competition
between two different reactivities or establish a synergy, as in the
case of benzaldehyde oxidative esterification. ILs’ p K a values place a limit on the strength of the
bases that can be effectively used in their combination, so if a stronger
base than NHC is needed, a change in solvent is necessary.

ELECTROGENERATED
NHCS IN IONIC LIQUIDS: THE
STORAGE POSSIBILITY
As previously stated, NHCs are highly
reactive species, although
stabilized in ILs. This implies that their generation must be carried
out just prior to their use. Nonetheless, the high NHC nucleophilicity
allows a rapid reaction with CO 2 , forming a stable NHC-CO 2 adduct. Such an adduct can be regarded as an NHC reservoir,
whose release can be obtained by heating ( T >
100
°C) or ultrasound irradiation.

The efficiency of such NHC release was demonstrated in the previously
described benzoin reaction and cinnamaldehyde oxidative esterification
( Figure a), obtaining
comparable yields to freshly prepared NHC. Moreover, a tentative released NHC quantification was probed by
reaction with elemental sulfur, yielding the corresponding imidazole-2-thione
( Figure b). After 3 days (in air) from electrogenerated
NHC-CO 2 adduct formation in IL, the thione yield
was still quite high (87 vs 99% with freshly prepared NHC). It should
be underlined that, despite the IL “protecting” effect
toward NHCs, if the same delayed reaction is carried out on a solution
of NHC in IL, the thione yield is as low as 28% ( Figure b).

(a) Stabilization and
release of NHCs-CO 2 and (b) reaction
with elemental sulfur.

It is thus clear that
the combination of electrochemical NHC generation,
NHC protecting effect of IL as solvent, and reversible NHC-CO 2 adduct formation enables the expansion of NHC use beyond
the VOC boundaries.

CONCLUSIONS
The combination of electrochemistry
and ILs constitutes a powerful
tool for organic reactions in a greener way. In particular, the possibility
to inject energy into the chemical system in the form of electricity
(potentially from renewable sources) allows for redox reactions without
the need for stoichiometric redox agents. Moreover, the simple regulation
or interruption of the current flow permits precise dosing of electroactivated
reagents. The major criticisms leveled at this technique (specialized
equipment and large amounts of supporting electrolyte) have been overcome
by the advent of commercial, cheap, and easy-to-handle equipment and
by the possibility to use ionic species (ILs) as both solvent and
supporting electrolyte. Their electrochemical window (the potential
interval in which the electrolyte itself is not electroactive) can
be seen as a measure of the involvement of the electrolyte in the
electrode processes. Usually, such an involvement is avoided, but
in some cases, this electroactivity can be an advantage. In particular,
imidazolium tetrafluoroborate ILs can electrogenerate NHC at the cathode
and BF 3 at the anode. The main advantage of such processes
(besides those previously mentioned) is that the IL environment stabilizes
such highly reactive species, thus modulating their reactivity. On
the other hand, the high IL viscosity and hygroscopicity could be
regarded as impediments to the performance of these reactions. While
this is certainly true for viscosity (sometimes requiring high temperatures),
it is not entirely accurate for hygroscopicity. Indeed, water is highly
segregated in ILs (sometimes used as dehydrating agents), and usually,
a minor sensitivity to water is experienced in ILs. IL electroactivation,
far from being the solution to all problems regarding NHC- and BF 3 -catalyzed reactions, should be considered as an opportunity
in organic synthesis. Moreover, the demonstrated possibility to reuse
the electrolyte in subsequent runs places ILs within the scope of
green chemistry. In conclusion, our suggestion to new organic chemist
generations is to keep an open mind about electrochemistry, which
can allow an expansion of their possibilities beyond the boundaries
of classical organic methodologies and solvents.