ABSTRACT
ABSTRACT Photochemical reactions play a significant role in organic transformation, the synthesis of natural products, and the development of advanced materials. This elegant approach has been widely explored for the construction of biologically active architectures that are often difficult to access through conventional thermal methods. Spirocyclic compounds represent an important class of compounds found in various approved drug candidates. This review summarizes the myriad photochemical reactions, particularly the visible‐light‐driven synthesis of aza, oxa, and aza-oxa spirocyclic compounds, reported during the periods 2015-2025. Most of the reactions discussed in this review are one‐pot synthetic approaches to access the desired spirocyclic product with excellent yield and regioselectivity. Overall, this review highlights the significance of photochemical methods as powerful tools for the sustainable construction of natural and synthetic spirocyclic scaffolds. Keywords: heterocycles, organic synthesis, photochemical reaction, spirocyclic

This review presents the visible‐light‐mediated photochemical reaction for the synthesis of aza, oxa, and aza-oxa spirocyclic compounds via photoinduced electron transfer (PET), hydrogen atom transfer (HAT), single‐electron transfer (SET), or energy transfer (EnT) pathways. This comprehensive account enables rational catalyst selection and reaction design of a medicinally important spirocyclic framework.

INTRODUCTION
Heterocycles are an important class of organic compounds widely distributed in nature and play essential roles in biological systems, agrochemicals, pharmaceuticals, and materials science [ 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 ]. The various biomolecules, such as vitamins, nucleic acids, enzymes, and antibiotics, contain heterocyclic skeletons, highlighting their significance in medicinal chemistry, drug development, and drug discovery [ 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 ]. Among several families of heterocyclic compounds, spiro heterocyclic compounds have attracted significant attention due to their relevance in medicinal compounds. Spiro compounds contain two cyclic rings connected through a single carbon atom [ 13 , 14 ]. This molecular architecture often improves biological and pharmacological properties such as selectivity, binding affinity and metabolic stability [ 15 , 16 , 17 ]. In recent times, spirocyclic skeletons are recognized as valuable moieties in drug design and development. Aza and oxa spirocyclic skeletons contain nitrogen and oxygen atoms in the ring system that significantly influence hydrogen‐bonding ability with target receptors and enzymes. Many FDA‐approved drugs containing aza and oxa spirocyclic compounds are presented in Figure 1 .

FDA‐approved drugs bearing aza and oxa‐spirocyclic compounds.

Buspirone is an oral medication approved by the FDA in 1986 for the management of anxiety disorders [ 18 ]. Fenspiride and fluspirilene are aza spirocyclic compounds approved by European countries in 1970 but withdrawn from the market due to the risk of heart failure [ 19 , 20 ]. The guandrel, spironolactone, and cevimeline are oxa spirocyclic compounds used for the management of hypertension, heart failure, and Sjögren's syndrome, respectively [ 21 , 22 , 23 ]. The list of FDA‐approved drugs bearing aza and oxa spirocyclic compounds is presented in Table 1 .

FDA‐approved drugs.

The construction of spiro heterocycles has gained significant attention due to their increasing relevance in medicinal chemistry [ 24 , 25 , 26 ]. The conventional synthetic methods often require high energy, harsh conditions, and multiple steps [ 27 , 28 , 29 , 30 , 31 , 32 ]. In recent years, photocatalyzed reactions have emerged at the forefront of organic synthetic methodology, facilitating a wide range of complex chemical transformations under light irradiation [ 33 , 34 , 35 , 36 , 37 , 38 , 39 , 40 ]. Visible light catalysis is a convenient and powerful method usually employed in the construction of medicinally important compounds. The photon‐mediated reaction possesses numerous advantages, such as a clean energy source, reduced pollution, reduced energy consumption, and avoidance of high temperatures [ 41 , 42 , 43 , 44 ]. The present review emphasizes the sustainable synthesis of aza‐, oxa‐spirocyclic compounds using photocatalysts. The myriads of photon‐mediated synthetic methodologies are presented for the construction of hetero‐spirocyclic compounds.

NOVELTY OF THE REVIEW
A Scopus data survey (2015-2025) reveals a rising trend in published reports on the application of visible‐light photochemical reactions for efficient organic reactions. Chowhan et al., in 2023, reported the visible light‐mediated photochemical reaction for the synthesis of spirocyclic oxindoles [ 45 ]. Another recent report by Srivastava et al. summarizes the photochemical approach for the synthesis of spirocyclic compounds under visible light irradiation [ 46 ]. This review provides a comprehensive account on visible‐light assisted photocatalysis to the synthesis of N/O‐containing spirocyclic frameworks (aza, oxa, and aza-oxa spirocycles), highlighting recent advances, green metrics, in depth mechanistic insight and future perspectives (Figure 2 ). This review provides critical insight to researcher working at the interface of visible‐light photocatalysis and spirocyclic synthesis, enabling rational catalyst selection, reaction design and sustainable development of medicinal important spirocyclic framework.

Novelty, significance, and unique contribution of the present review.

VISIBLE LIGHT PROMOTED SYNTHESIS OF SPIRO HETEROCYCLES
Visible light photocatalysis is an important tool for modern organic synthesis due to its compatibility with green chemistry principles. Upon visible‐light irradiation, the photocatalyst is promoted to an excited state that can activate substrates through photoinduced electron transfer (PET), hydrogen atom transfer (HAT), single‐electron transfer (SET), or energy transfer (EnT) pathways, generating reactive radical or excited‐state intermediates that facilitate the formation of new chemical bonds [ 47 , 48 , 49 , 50 , 51 , 52 ]. Commonly used visible‐light sources include LED lamps, CFL lamps, and xenon lamps that enable efficient photocatalytic synthesis of spiro heterocycles, particularly aza and oxa‐spiro compounds. The visible light‐mediated reaction offers several advantages, such as efficient activation of the photocatalyst, reduced energy consumption, mild reaction conditions, better control over reaction selectivity, and compatibility with green chemistry.

Aza spirocyclic compounds exhibit remarkable biological properties and are frequently found in natural products and pharmacologically active compounds. In view of this, Wei and coworkers reported the visible‐light‐assisted synthesis of polysubstituted aza‐spirocyclic compounds in a one‐pot reaction. The metal‐free spirocyclization of alkyne 1 with substituted sulfonic acid 2 in the presence of Na 2 ‐eosin Y photocatalyst (5 mol%) under the irradiation of a 3 W blue LED afforded azaspirocyclic product 3(a-c) in good yield at room temperature and mild reaction conditions (CH 3 CN/H 2 O solvent system). This method showed excellent substrate scope with aryl sulfonic acid, alkyl sulfonic acid, and thiols. The optimization results revealed that spirocyclization did not proceed without a photocatalyst and visible‐light irradiation. Mechanistically, N ‐( p ‐methoxyaryl)propiolamides undergo cascade radical addition and ipso ‐cyclization process under atmospheric conditions. Initially, photoexcitation of Na 2 ‐eosin Y to Na 2 ‐eosin Y* in the presence of blue LED light irradiation. Subsequently, a single electron transfer from sulfinic acid to Na 2 ‐eosin Y* gives the radical cation and Na 2 ‐eosin Y •- radical anion. The oxidation of Na 2 ‐eosin Y •- by dioxygen (air) affords the ground‐state Na 2 ‐eosin Y and O 2 •- . Then, the radical cation is deprotonated by O 2 •- , leading to the oxygen‐centered radical resonating with the sulfonyl radical. The resulting sulfonyl radical interacts with 1 to produce the vinyl radical, which undergoes intramolecular spiro‐cyclization of the vinyl radical with an aryl ring, generating the radical intermediate, which is then finally oxidized and converted into the azaspiro[4,5]trienone derivatives. This protocol simply utilizes visible light as a safe and clean energy source, an inexpensive and nontoxic photocatalyst (Scheme 1 ) [ 53 ].

Visible light‐assisted synthesis of azaspiro[4,5]trienones.

Another visible light‐assisted synthesis of sulfonated aza‐spirocyclic was reported by Liu and coworkers. The eosin Y photocatalyst promoted the cyclization of propiolamides 4 with substituted aniline 5 and DABSO [DABCO.(SO 2 ) 2 ] in aqueous medium to furnish desired product 6(a-f) up to 91% yield under the irradiation of blue LED (5 W) at argon atmosphere. The visible light‐driven sulfonylation and ipso cyclization promote the radical process via SET (single‐electron transfer) to construct the spiro product. The formation of aryldiazonium cation A from arylamine 5 under the diazotization action of t BuONO with DABSO via electrostatic interaction to generate complex B . Then, homolytic cleavage of the N─S bond, followed by a single‐electron transfer (SET) process, produces the p ‐methoxyaryl radical C , sulfur dioxide, and a radical cation. Subsequently, sulfur dioxide was trapped by the aryl radical C to furnish the sulfonyl radical D . The addition of radical D to the carbon-carbon triple bond in propiolamide 4 afforded the intermediate E , which underwent ipso‐carbocyclization to construct the intermediate F . Next, the radical F was oxidized by the intermediate I via a SET process to generate the cation intermediate G and DABCO (1,4‐diazabicyclo[2.2.2]octane). Then, H 2 O underwent hydrolysis with the action of DABCO to form a hydroxyl ion, which attacked the cation G to provide intermediate H . Finally, the release of the OMe group and then deprotonation led to the terminal product 6 . This methodology has wide substrate scope; the ethoxy substituent showed maximum yield, whereas the chloro and methyl substituents showed lower yield (Scheme 2 ) [ 54 ].

Eosin Y‐assisted synthesis of sulfonated aza‐spirocyclic.

Further metal‐based photocatalyst Ir(ppy) 3 was reported for the efficient synthesis of aza spirocyclic compounds in aqueous medium. The ipso‐cyclization of propiolamides 7 with oxime ester 8 under irradiation of blue LED for 24 h at argon atmosphere to form target product 9(a-d) . The plausible mechanism for the acylation/ipso cyclization of alkynes with acyl oxime esters via a visible‐light‐mediated nitrogen‐centered radical pathway. Under visible light irradiation, Ir III is converted into excited Ir III* , which transforms the oxime ester into an oxime ester radical and simultaneously converts Ir III* to Ir IV via the SET pathway. Then, the oxime intermediate decomposes RO to form the A intermediate, which reacts with acetonitrile and propiolamides 7 to generate B , which subsequently undergoes cyclization to generate the C intermediate. The conversion of C into D and Ir III to Ir IV occurs with the formation of a carbocation via the SET process. The formed intermediate D reacts with hydroxide ion and assembles to the final product (Scheme 3 ) [ 55 ].

Photon‐mediated synthesis of 3‐acylated aza spirocyclic scaffold.

Base‐mediated and photocatalyst‐free synthesis of halogenated spiro[4,5]trienones was reported by Liu and coworkers. The substituted propiolamides 10 was treated with phenyliodine bis(trifluoroacetate) PIFA in base sodium acetate to furnish aza spirocyclic 11(a-d) at room temperature. This methodology has green credentials, utilizing a clean energy source and avoiding an external photocatalyst. The halogen radical was produced from PhI(OCOCF 3 ) 2 under the irradiation of a blue LED. Next, the halogen radical was added to the triple bond of arylpropiolamide to produce vinyl radical A , which underwent spirocyclization B and oxidation to generate C carbocation intermediate. Then, the trifluoroacetate anion attacked the electropositive aromatic C(sp2) to form D , which finally converted into the final product with the removal of methoxy ions (Scheme 4 ) [ 56 ].

Room temperature synthesis of halogenated aza‐spirocyclic.

Zeng et al., reported visible light‐induced synthesis of azaspirotrienones 13(a-d) by cascade annulation of N ‐arylpropiolamides 12 with 1‐trifluoromethyl‐1,2‐benziodoxol‐3(1H)‐one (Togni's reagent II) or ammonium thiocyanate (NH 4 SCN) synthon in presence of photocatalyst 2,4,5,6‐tetra(9H‐carbazol‐9‐yl)isophthalonitrile (4CzIPN) under irradiation of blue LED (10 W) at room temperature. The mechanism initiate by the excitation of 4CzIPN to 4CzIPN* under blue light which immediately transfer its energy to N ‐arylpropiolamide 12 to produce excited A intermediate via EnT pathway. The formed intermediate A produce vinyl radical B which cyclized and produce desired product. The reported methodology is base‐free, metal‐free, visible‐light assisted, easy scalability, wide substrate tolerance, room temperature and environmentally friendly (Scheme 5 ) [ 57 ].

Metal‐free visible light mediated synthesis of aza spirocyclic.

The substituted N ‐allyl‐ N ‐(2‐iodophenyl)cyclohexanecarboxamide 14 underwent tandem intramolecular cyclization in the presence of photocatalyst Ir(ppy) 3 and commercially available reductant γ‐terpinene, affording aza spirocyclic compounds 15(a-d) via 1,5‐H atom transfer (HAT) processes. A variety of fascinating spirocyclic compounds were synthesized in good yield up to 93% under mild reaction conditions. This synthetic methodology has broad utility in the preparation of pharmaceutical‐relevant compounds. Upon blue LED irradiation, the photocatalyst Ir(ppy) 3 is excited to Ir(ppy) 3 * , which undergoes single‐electron transfer (SET) with the aryl iodide to generate an aryl radical. This radical undergoes an intramolecular 1,5‐hydrogen atom transfer (1,5‐HAT) to form a stabilized tertiary carbon‐centered radical. Subsequently, 5‐exo‐trig radical cyclization onto the tethered alkene constructs the spirocyclic framework. The resulting radical abstracts a hydrogen atom from γ ‐terpinene, affording the γ ‐spirolactam product. Finally, the cyclohexadienyl radical reduces Ir(ppy) 3 + back to Ir(ppy) 3 , completing the photoredox catalytic cycle (Scheme 6 ) [ 58 ].

Photoinduced tandem intramolecular cyclization to the synthesis of spirolactum.

Habert and coworkers reported the photoinduced intramolecular cyclization of N ‐substituted amide under the irradiation of blue LED light. In the presence of iodobenzene and mesityl‐2,6‐diphenylpyrylium tetrafluoroborate (MDPT), several aza‐spirocyclic product successfully synthesized. The reaction accelerates through an aerobic iodoarene catalytic cycle, enabling facile spirocyclization to form N ‐substituted spirolactum. A range of functional groups showed good tolerance and provided the desired product in moderate to good yields. Under blue LED irradiation, the pyrylium photocatalyst is excited to its oxidizing state, which oxidizes the iodoarene catalyst to an iodoaryl radical cation. Subsequent reaction with oxygen and HFIP (hexafluoroisopropanol) generates the active hypervalent iodine(III) species. This iodine(III) intermediate activates the N ‐oxy amide 16 to form a reactive nitrogen species (nitrenium ion or N ‐centered radical), which undergoes intramolecular spirocyclization to furnish the N ‐fused spirolactam 17(a-d) . The iodoarene catalyst is regenerated, while molecular oxygen reoxidizes the reduced photocatalyst, completing both the photoredox and iodoarene catalytic cycles (Scheme 7 ) [ 59 ].

Photon‐mediated synthesis of spirocyclic compounds.

The visible‐light driven photo redox strategy for the synthesis of spirocyclohexadiene oxindole through carbamoyl radical‐initiated dearomative spirocyclization is illustrated in Scheme 8 . The feasibility of reaction was evaluated using biphenyl oxoacetic acid 18 as model starting substrate for irradiation under blue LED. After optimization, the best condition employed LiOH (lithium hydroxide) as a base, 4CzIPN as a photocatalyst and NMP/H 2 O solvent at room temperature under an argon atmosphere. Control experiment confirmed that base, light and photocatalyst are essential for the reactions. This protocol exhibits a broad substrate scope, tolerating various N ‐alkyl, benzyl, ethyl and phenylethyl substituents, giving product 19(a-d) in moderate yield (60%-73%). Both electron‐donating and electron‐withdrawing substituents are well tolerated, including halogen substituents, enabling post functionalization. The x‐ray crystallography confirmed the structure of compounds. Further, this strategy illustrated the late‐stage functionalization of drugs molecules such as ibuprofen, oxaprozin, nateglinide, and gemfibrozil highlighting its potential application in drug synthesis and medicinal chemistry. Under 455 nm blue LED irradiation, the excited photocatalyst 4CzIPN* undergoes a single‐electron transfer (SET) with the lithium salt of the oxamic acid, generating an oxamic acid radical that rapidly decarboxylates to form a carbamoyl radical. The carbamoyl radical undergoes intramolecular 5‐exo‐trig dearomative spirocyclization, producing a spirocyclic radical intermediate. Subsequent reduction by 4CzIPN• - affords an anionic intermediate, which is protonated by water to furnish the spiro‐cyclohexadiene oxindole product while regenerating the photocatalyst [ 60 ].

Photo redox strategy for the synthesis of aza‐spirocyclohexadiene.

A visible‐light photocatalytic cascade radical cyclization strategy was developed for the synthesis of formyl‐substituted oxindoles 21 using N ‐arylacrylamides 20 and 1,3‐dioxolane through dual C-H functionalization. A carbazolic‐cyano conjugated microporous polymer (CC‐CMP) derived from 4CzIPN was employed as a heterogeneous metal‐free photocatalyst under irradiation blue LED (5 W). The optimized conditions used oxidant TBHP ( tert ‐butyl hydroperoxide) to produce N ‐methyl oxindoles. Polymerization of the 4CzIPN (,2,3,5‐tetrakis(carbazol‐9‐yl)‐4,6‐dicyanobenzene) monomer generated a porous CC‐CMP catalyst with enhanced thermal stability, light absorption, and recyclability. The photocatalyst could be reused for at least five cycles without significant loss of activity, demonstrating practical sustainability. The reaction was also scalable to gram‐scale synthesis, highlighting its synthetic utility. Importantly, the obtained oxindoles served as key intermediates for the concise synthesis of bioactive indoline alkaloids such as esermethole, desoxyeseroline, and N ‐Me‐coerulescine 22 with overall yields up to 74%. This methodology demonstrates the potential of reusable polymer semiconductor photocatalysts for sustainable synthesis of complex heterocycles and pharmaceutical alkaloids (Scheme 9 ) [ 61 ]. Upon visible‐light irradiation, the CC‐CMP photocatalyst is excited and transfers a single electron (SET) to TBHP, generating a tert ‐butoxy radical. The tert ‐butoxy radical abstracts a hydrogen atom from 1,3‐dioxolane to form an alkoxyalkyl radical. This radical adds to the double bond of N ‐arylacrylamide, producing a carbon‐centered radical that undergoes intramolecular radical cyclization to afford an oxindole radical intermediate. Subsequent oxidation by the oxidized photocatalyst, followed by rearomatization and hydrolysis, furnishes the 3‐formyloxindole product while regenerating the CC‐CMP photocatalyst.

Cascade radical cyclization. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [ 53 ], copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.

Zhang and coworkers describe a visible‐light‐induced [3+2]cycloaddition strategy for the synthesis of spiropyrazoline derivatives 25(a-d) using starting synthon N ‐tosylhydrazone 23 and butyl acrylate 24 under irradiation of a blue LED, 1,8‐diazabicycloundec‐7‐ene (DBU) base, and water in 2‐MeTHF (2‐methyltetrahydrofuran) solvent. Mechanistic studies (NMR titration, UV-vis, trapping experiment, and DFT calculation) suggest that non‐covalent interaction between the DBU and N ‐tosylhydrazone under visible light leads to diazo formation, which subsequently undergoes [3+2] cycloaddition to afford spiropyrazoline derivatives with up to 82% yield (Scheme 10 ) [ 62 ]. Under 456 nm blue‐light irradiation, the N ‐tosylhydrazone is first deprotonated by DBU to form the corresponding N ‐tosylhydrazone anion, which associates with DBU through a non‐covalent complex. Photoexcitation of this complex induces homolytic N─S bond cleavage, releasing the sulfonyl group and generating an in situ donor/donor diazo intermediate. The diazo species then undergoes a [3+2] cycloaddition with the alkene to afford the (spiro)pyrazoline product. In the case of aldehyde‐derived substrates, the initially formed pyrazoline undergoes base‐promoted elimination to furnish the corresponding pyrazole spirocyclic compounds.

Visible‐light induced [3+2] cycloaddition for spiropyrazoline synthesis.

Borah and coworkers reported a visible‐light organphotocatalytic domino strategy for the synthesis of C‐3 functionalized spiro[indoline‐3,4 ’ ‐pyridine] 30(a-d) using rose bengal as a photocatalyst. This reaction involves a four‐component coupling of isatin 26 , malononitrile 27 , dimethyl acetylenedicarboxylate 28 , and substituted aniline 29 in H 2 O:ethanol (9:1) solvent under blue LED irradiation at room temperature. Mechanistic studies revealed that the radical pathway was initiated by singlet oxygen generated from the excited photocatalyst via SET processes. The greenness of the reaction was confirmed by high atom economy, carbon efficiency, reaction mass efficiency, atom economy, and reduced environmental factor (E‐factor) (Scheme 11 ) [ 63 ].

Visible light‐induced C3 and C11 functionalization of spiro[indoline‐3,4‐pyridine].

Floden and coworkers reported the visible‐light‐mediated synthesis of N ‐heterospirocycles 33(a-f) from easily available aliphatic aldehyde/ketone 32 and alkene‐containing secondary amines 31 . The optimization studies indicate that the photocatalyst [Ir(dMeppy) 2 (dtbpy)]PF 6 , Hantzsch ester, and 1,4‐cyclohexadiene significantly improve the reaction yield under blue‐light irradiation. This photocatalytic method displays broad substrate scope, tolerating alkenyl amine, aldehyde, and ketone. Mechanistic investigation indicates the formation of an α‐amino radical via single‐electron transfer, followed by intramolecular cyclization and hydrogen‐atom transfer. This methodology offers potential interest to practitioners of both medicinal and synthetic chemistry (Scheme 12 ) [ 64 ].

Visible light enabled the synthesis of N ‐heterospirocycles.

Griffiths and Ley illustrate the visible‐light‐induced one‐pot synthesis of spiro‐pyrrolidine derivatives 36(a-d) from N ‐allylsulfonamides 35 and alkenes under irradiation of LED light (470 nm) and an Ir‐based photocatalyst (0.5 mol%). The chlorinating agent 1,3‐dichloro‐5,5‐dimethylhydantoin (DCDMH) was utilized for the conversion of 34 to 35 . A number of β‐spirocyclic pyrrolidines have been constructed, including drug analogs, in moderate to good yield. This protocol also demonstrates product derivatization and scalable synthesis using flow chemistry techniques, highlighting its practical utility (Scheme 13 ) [ 65 ]. Upon visible‐light irradiation, the Ir(III) photocatalyst is excited to Ir(III)*, which undergoes single‐electron transfer (SET) to the N ‐halo sulfonamide, promoting homolytic N─X bond cleavage and generating an N ‐centered amidyl radical. The amidyl radical undergoes 5‐exo‐trig intramolecular cyclization onto the allyl group to form a pyrrolidinyl radical. This carbon‐centered radical subsequently adds to the exocyclic olefin, producing a new tertiary radical that undergoes halogen atom transfer (XAT) from the dihalohydantoin reagent to furnish the β‐halomethylated γ‐spirocyclic pyrrolidine product while regenerating the radical species and completing the catalytic cycle.

Visible‐mediated cycloaddition for synthesis of spiro pyrrolidines derivatives.

Another metal‐free visible‐light‐induced selenylative spirocyclization of N ‐aryl alkynamides 37 with diaryl diselenides 38 and molecular oxygen as the oxidant under blue LED irradiation in acetonitrile reaction medium. This methodology produces numerous substituted 3‐selenospiro[4,5]trienones 39(a-c) in good to excellent yield. Under blue LED irradiation, the diaryl diselenide undergoes homolytic Se─Se bond cleavage to generate an aryl selenyl radical (ArSe•). The selenyl radical adds to the alkyne of the N ‐aryl alkynamide, forming a vinyl radical intermediate. This radical then undergoes intramolecular ipso‐spirocyclization onto the aryl ring, producing a spirocyclic radical intermediate. In the presence of molecular oxygen, the radical intermediate is oxidized through a peroxide intermediate, followed by O─O bond cleavage to afford the 3‐selenospiro[4,5]trienone product. Molecular oxygen acts as the terminal oxidant, while visible light continuously generates the reactive selenyl radicals. The protocol also fascinates the gram‐scale synthesis and further derivatization, including ring opening to form polysubstituted acryl amides (Scheme 14 ) [ 66 ].

Visible light induced spiro cyclization of N ‐aryl alkynamides.

Soni and coworkers reported a photocatalytic energy‐transfer strategy for generating N‐centered radicals from oxadiazoline precursor 40 using fac‐Ir(ppy) 3 under CFL light (23 W). The formed nitrogen radicals, together with singlet oxygen, undergo selective ipso‐addition to arenes, leading to remotely double‐functionalized spiroimidazoline products 41(a-c) . Mechanistic and control experiments confirm that the process proceeds through an energy‐transfer pathway rather than electron transfer via DFT experiments. This synthetic strategy enables the construction of diverse cyclohexadienone‐containing spiro compounds, which are valuable for complex organic synthesis and potential therapeutic targets (Scheme 15 ) [ 67 ].

Synthesis of spiroimidazoline via N ‐centered radical pathways. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [ 59 ], copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.

Oxa‐spirocyclic compounds serve as an important motif containing oxygen‐containing heterocycles for the development of novel molecular frameworks and therapeutic agents. In view of this, Manna and coworkers reported the visible‐light‐assisted ipso annulation of alkyne 42 to furnish oxa‐spirocyclic compounds 44(a-d) under the irradiation of blue LED, Ru‐photocatalyst Ru(bpy) 3 (PF6) 2 , and oxidant potassium persulfate (K 2 S 2 O 8 ). This methodology shows excellent chemoselectivity and broad functional group tolerance. Additionally, this synthesis enables the conversion of a tricarbonylated starting synthon to a monocarbonylated product, which is difficult to obtain using conventional synthetic methods (Scheme 16 ) [ 68 ]. Upon blue LED irradiation, the Ru(bpy) 3 2 + photocatalyst is excited and transfers an electron to persulfate, generating a sulfate radical and Ru(bpy) 3 3 + . The sulfate radical abstracts a hydrogen atom from the 1,3,3‐tricarbonyl compound to produce an alkyl radical. This radical adds to the activated alkyne, forming a vinyl radical that undergoes intramolecular ipso‐cyclization to generate a spirocyclic radical intermediate. Oxidation of this radical by Ru(bpy) 3 3+ produces a carbocation, which is trapped by water to furnish the 3‐alkylated spiro[4,5]‐trienone product while regenerating the Ru(bpy) 3 2+ photocatalyst.

Visible light‐mediated synthesis of oxa‐spirocyclic compounds.

In 2023, Manna and coworkers reported visible light‐mediated difunctionalization of activated alkyne 45 with boronic acids using a ruthenium photocatalyst and a hypervalent iodine reagent 46 to furnish oxa‐spirocyclic scaffold 47(a-d) via a radical addition cascade cyclization process (Scheme 17 ) [ 69 ]. Upon irradiation with CFL light, the Ru(II) photocatalyst is excited and undergoes oxidative quenching with the hypervalent iodine reagent to generate a benziodoxyl radical and Ru(III). The benziodoxyl radical reacts with the alkyl boronic acid to produce an alkyl radical, which regioselectively adds to the activated alkyne to form a vinyl radical. Intramolecular ipso‐annulation then generates a spirocyclic radical intermediate. This radical is oxidized by Ru(III) to form a carbocation, which is trapped by hydroxide to afford the spirolactone product while regenerating the Ru(II) photocatalyst.

Visible light‐assisted rapid synthesis of oxa‐spirocyclic derivatives. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [ 61 ]. Copyright 2023, American Chemical Society.

Murray and coworkers described the visible‐light‐promoted intermolecular crossed [2+2] cycloaddition using an Ir(III) photosensitizer. The reaction between exocyclic arylidene oxetanes, azetidines, or cyclobutanes 48 and electron‐deficient alkenes 49 provides polysubstituted 2‐oxaspiro[3.3]heptanes, 2‐azaspiro[3.3]heptanes, and spiro[3.3]heptanes 50(a-d) under mild conditions. These motifs are valuable bioisosteres in medicinal chemistry. Further transformations of the cycloadducts allow selective access to syn‐ or anti‐diastereomers. Mechanistic studies and DFT calculations indicate that the reaction proceeds via a triplet energy‐transfer pathway (Scheme 18 ) [ 70 ]. Upon irradiation of blue LED, the Ir(III) photocatalyst is excited to its triplet state and transfers its energy to the exocyclic arylidene substrate through a triplet energy transfer (EnT) process. The resulting triplet‐state arylidene intermediate undergoes intermolecular C─C bond formation with the electron‐deficient alkene to generate a 1,4‐triplet diradical. This intermediate then undergoes intersystem crossing (ISC) to form a 1,4‐singlet diradical, followed by intramolecular C─C bond formation to furnish the 2‐oxaspiro[3.3]heptane product. The photocatalyst is regenerated after the energy transfer step, completing the catalytic cycle.

Visible light‐assisted synthesis of oxa‐spirocyclic compounds.

An efficient blue LED-induced photochemical reaction between vinyldiazoacetates 52 and quinones 51 has been developed to synthesize spirocyclic dihydrofurans containing the oxaspiro[4,5]decane core 53(a-e) . Unlike typical diazo photochemistry, this transformation does not proceed through a vinylcarbene intermediate. Instead, triplet excitation of quinone followed by energy transfer to the vinyldiazo ester generates a diradical intermediate that forms the spirocyclic product with loss of nitrogen. Under the optimized conditions (blue LED irradiation in acetonitrile), a large number of spirocyclic products were obtained in good yield. The resulting spirocycles can further undergo strain‐release and Brønsted acid‐catalyzed rearrangement to produce chromene derivatives. This method provides an efficient strategy for skeletal diversification of valuable heterocyclic frameworks relevant to medicinal and materials chemistry (Scheme 19 ) [ 71 ].

Expedient visible light access to oxa‐spirocyclic compounds.

A visible‐light‐induced radical cascade cyclization strategy was developed for the synthesis of O ‐heterocycle spiro‐fused cyclopentaquinolinones. The reaction of N ‐( o ‐ethynylaryl)acrylamides or enyne derivatives 54 with 1,4‐dioxane 55 proceeds under blue LED irradiation using fac‐Ir(ppy) 3 as a photocatalyst and TBPB as a radical initiator to furnish spiro‐fused quinoline derivatives 56(a-d) . The process involves radical generation followed by regioselective addition and sequential 6‐exo‐dig and 5‐endo‐trig annulation. This protocol operates under mild conditions and exhibits broad substrate scope with good functional‐group tolerance. Various O ‐heterocycles such as dioxane, oxane, tetrahydrofuran, and benzofuran participate efficiently in the reaction. Mechanistic studies confirm the involvement of α‐alkoxy alkyl radicals in the cascade process. Overall, the method provides an efficient and sustainable approach for constructing complex O ‐heterocycle spiro‐fused frameworks (Scheme 20 ) [ 72 ].

Synthesis of dioxane‐bearing spiro compounds. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [ 64 ]. Copyright 2023, American Chemical Society.

A visible‐light‐mediated β‐C(sp 3 )-H amination of glycosylimidates 57 was developed for the synthesis of oxazoline‐fused and spiro bicyclic sugars 58(a-c) . The reaction proceeds through formation of an imidate N ‐centered radical under blue LED irradiation, followed by intramolecular 1,5‐hydrogen atom transfer (1,5‐HAT) and N─C bond formation to generate conformationally constrained bicyclic structures with a quaternary center. The method shows good functional‐group tolerance and works under metal‐free conditions. The products were obtained in moderate to good yields (up to ∼79%), and the oxazoline‐fused sugars were further used as glycosyl donors for the synthesis of β‐mannosides (Scheme 21 ) [ 73 ].

Visible‐light‐mediated oxazoline‐fused spirocyclic derivatives.

A visible‐light‐driven catalytic method was developed for the synthesis of N , O ‐spirocycles 60(a-d) from 2‐amidated acetylenic alcohols 59 . Using anthraquinone as a photocatalyst and methyl thioglycolate as a HAT catalyst, the reaction proceeds under blue‐light irradiation with oxygen as the sole oxidant at room temperature. The process involves amidyl radical generation followed by intramolecular addition and cyclization, affording multifunctional N , O ‐spirocycles in moderate to good yields (43%-78%) with broad functional‐group tolerance. Mechanistically, under blue LED irradiation, anthraquinone (AQ) is excited and oxidizes the N ‐aryl amide substrate through a single‐electron transfer (SET), generating a radical cation. Methyl thioglycolate then promotes a proton‐coupled electron transfer (PCET) process to form an amidyl radical. The amidyl radical undergoes intramolecular addition to the alkyne, producing a vinyl radical, which is trapped by molecular oxygen to form a peroxy radical intermediate. Subsequent protonation, O─O bond cleavage, oxidation, enol isomerization, and intramolecular hydroxyl cyclization furnish the N , O ‐spirocycle product. This metal‐free and mild strategy is also applicable to late‐stage modification of natural products and drug molecules, highlighting its value in medicinal chemistry (Scheme 22 ) [ 74 ].

Visible‐light‐driven synthesis of N , O ‐spirocycles derivatives. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [ 66 ]. Copyright 2023, American Chemical Society.

A red‐light‐mediated photocatalytic method was developed for the synthesis of CF 3 ‐containing 3,3‐spirocyclic indolines. Using [ n Pr‐DMQA + ] as a photocatalyst and Umemoto's reagent 62 as the CF 3 source, indole derivatives 61 undergo trifluoromethylation followed by dearomatization and intramolecular cyclization under mild conditions. The reaction proceeds via CF 3 radical formation and a benzyl carbocation intermediate, giving the desired spirocyclic products 63(a-d) in moderate to high yields with excellent diastereoselectivity. This red‐light‐driven protocol is scalable and efficient, demonstrating its practical value for synthesizing biologically relevant spiro compounds (Scheme 23 ) [ 67 ].

Red light‐assisted synthesis of CF 3 ‐containing 3,3‐spirocyclic indolines.

A visible‐light‐mediated spiroannulation method was developed for the synthesis of 1‐oxa‐4‐aza‐spirooxazolines 66(a-e) from quinones 64 and vinyl azides 65 as starting precursors. This reaction utilized rose bengal as an organic photoredox catalyst and blue LED irradiation to furnish the desired product at room temperature. It proceeds through a radical pathway, where photoexcited quinone reacts with vinyl azide A to form an iminyl radical intermediate C , followed by spirocyclization. This protocol provides the desired spirooxazoline derivatives in good to excellent yields (up to ∼95%) with broad substrate scope and demonstrates potential for large‐scale synthesis (Scheme 24 ) [ 76 ].

Visible‐light‐mediated spiroannulation for the synthesis of spirooxazolines.

Recently in 2025, Yan and coworkers reported aza‐Norrish-Yang‐type visible‐light‐mediated cyclization, enabling the rapid synthesis of spiroisothiazole via energy transfer catalysis [ 77 ]. The starting substrate benzyloxy cyclosulfonimide 67 underwent nucleophilic substitution followed by an addition and elimination pathway for the synthesis of spiro product 68(a-d) using thioxanthone as photocatalyst and acetonitrile solvent under the irradiation of a purple LED (385 nm) for 2 h. Upon 385 nm visible‐light irradiation, the thioxanthone (TX) photocatalyst is excited to its triplet state and transfers energy (EnT) to the cyclic imine substrate. The excited triplet imine undergoes an intramolecular 1,5‐hydrogen atom abstraction (1,5‐HAA) to generate a biradical intermediate A , which undergoes intersystem crossing (ISC) to form a conjugated diene intermediate B . Finally, electrocyclization (or intramolecular nucleophilic addition, depending on the substrate) constructs the azaspirocyclic product, while the photocatalyst is regenerated to complete the catalytic cycle. The DFT study, control experiment, kinetic studies, and deuterium labeling provide evidence of a stereoselective photochemical pathway via energy transfer catalysis (Scheme 25 ) [ 78 , 79 ].

Visible‐light‐mediated aza‐Norrish-Yang‐type cyclization for the rapid synthesis of hexahydropyrrolo[ b ]isothiazoles.

The comparative assessment for the synthesis of N/O‐containing heterocycles using visible light photocatalysts is summarized in Table 2 . Overall, organic photocatalysts such as eosin, rose bengal, 4CzIPN, quinones, anthraquinone, and thioxanthon provide sustainable and metal‐free alternatives with excellent functional‐group tolerance and high product yield. In contrast, Ru‐ and Ir‐based photocatalysts generally afford higher efficiencies and broader substrate tolerance but suffer from limited sustainability, high cost, and the need for an inert atmosphere. Among the reported methods, 4CzIPN and Rose Bengal stand out as particularly attractive because of their operational simplicity, broad substrate scope, and avoidance of precious metals, whereas several Ir‐catalyzed protocols are limited by long reaction times (up to 90 h) and expensive photocatalysts. Common limitations across these methodologies include the requirement for inert atmospheres, specialized light sources, chlorinated solvents, peroxide oxidants, or extended irradiation times, indicating new opportunities for future development of more sustainable, scalable, and energy‐efficient visible‐light photocatalytic protocols.

Comparative assessment of photocatalyst system for the synthesis of N/O‐containing spirocyclic compounds.

CONCLUSION
The spirocyclic skeleton bearing the unique quaternary carbon is widely found in approved drugs, natural products, and agrochemicals. Their intriguing three‐dimensional structure would enhance the biological properties by reducing the conformational entropy upon binding to the target, which improves pharmacokinetic and water solubility profiles. The synthesis of spirocyclic compounds is of particular interest to organic and medicinal chemists. Despite significant advancements in the construction of spiro building blocks, there is still a need for sustainable, direct, catalytic pathways for the synthesis of spirocyclic compounds. In this context, visible‐light‐mediated transformations have emerged as powerful and environmentally benign tools for the rapid construction of diverse spirocyclic architectures under mild conditions. Continued advancements in photochemical reactions are expected to provide new opportunities for the preparation of hetero spirocyclic compounds and further expand their applications in materials and pharmaceutical science.

The visible‐light photochemical reaction has been recognized as a powerful and sustainable strategy for the synthesis of structurally complex hetero spirocyclic compounds. Future endeavors in this area are expected to focus on the design of more efficient and environmentally friendly photocatalytic systems, specifically based on metal‐free, inexpensive organic dyes and oxidants. Wide substrate scope and improved tolerance of functional groups will further enable the construction of diverse functionalized hetero spirocyclic skeletons. More attention is required to integrate visible‐light photocatalysis with tandem and cascade reactions, which may provide robust and rapid access to spirocyclic compounds in a minimum number of steps with high yield. The development of enantioselective photochemical reactions will also be valuable for preparing chiral spirocyclic compounds with remarkable biological potential. Emerging approaches involving heterogeneous and recyclable photocatalysts, electro‐photocatalysis, and dual catalytic strategies are expected to improve reaction sustainability, catalyst recovery, and overall process efficiency. Furthermore, AI‐assisted reaction optimization, computational mechanistic investigations, and machine‐learning‐guided catalyst design may provide deeper insight into reaction pathways, facilitating improved selectivity, yield, and reaction predictability. The application of photochemical reactions in late‐stage functionalization of natural products and biologically active molecules could enhance their relevance in medicinal chemistry. Advances in continuous‐flow technologies and large‐scale photochemical reactors would also facilitate industrial application. However, several challenges, including photocatalyst stability, photocatalyst deactivation, limited light penetration, and mechanistic complexity, still require further attention.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Annu Bhardwaj : writing - original draft, structure drawn. Shivangi Jaiswal : writing - original draft, editing. Khushboo Bhardwaj : formal analysis. Swapnil Sharma : supervision, formal analysis. Jaya Dwivedi : conceptualization, review and editing, supervision.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Prof. Ina Aditya Shastri, Vice‐Chancellor of Banasthali Vidyapith, Rajasthan, India, for successfully accomplishing the present work. The authors also acknowledge the Department of Science and Technology (DST‐FIST, India (Order Number SR/FST/2022/252) for providing the infrastructure support.

BIOGRAPHIES
Shivangi Jaiswal is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Chemistry at JECRC University, Jaipur. She completed her doctoral degree in chemistry from Banasthali Vidyapith, Rajasthan, in 2024 under the supervision of Prof. Jaya Dwivedi. Her research focuses on the green synthesis of bioactive nitrogen heterocycles from simple starting synthon. She possesses extensive expertise in analytical and spectroscopy techniques.

Jaya Dwivedi is serving as Head in the Department of Chemistry and the Dean in School of Life Sciences, Banasthali Vidyapith, Rajasthan, India. With over 25 years of research experience, her expertise lies in organic and medicinal chemistry, natural product chemistry, nanomaterials, and the development of advanced materials for various environmental application. She plays a crucial role in mentoring students, shaping curriculum, and providing academic leadership.

DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
Data sharing is not applicable to this article as no datasets were generated or analyzed during the current study.

ASSOCIATED DATA
Data sharing is not applicable to this article as no datasets were generated or analyzed during the current study.