ABSTRACT
The organic photoredox-catalyzed
disproportionation of TEMPO (2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxyl)
is reported with application to the oxidation of alcohols. Although
traditional methods of TEMPO disproportionation rely on strong acids,
this research provides milder, sustainable conditions using visible
light and a weak acid with very small loading (<0.10 mol %) of
a common and affordable organic photocatalyst. This method is compatible
with acid-sensitive functional groups and applicable to a broad range
of primary benzylic, allylic, and aliphatic alcohols with excellent
to moderate yields. Detailed mechanistic investigations were employed
including Stern-Volmer luminescence quenching analysis, direct
UV-vis observation of the fleeting oxoammonium ion intermediate,
kinetic isotope effect analysis, and partial rate order determination
of the weak acid. These results highlight the key role of the excited
photocatalyst in promoting disproportionation with only a small dependence
on weak acid. This novel approach expands the applications of TEMPO
disproportionation using mild photoredox-catalyzed conditions to bypass
the strong acid requirement for greater substrate compatibility while
exploring new methodologies for in situ oxoammonium ion generation
without the use of external oxidants.

INTRODUCTION
TEMPO (2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxyl)
is a stable nitroxyl
radical that is commonly used for mechanistic analysis as a radical
scavenger. Additionally, TEMPO has received
significant interest due to its ability to exist in two additional
oxidation states ( Scheme A): an oxidized form (oxoammonium
ion) and a reduced form (hydroxylamine). In particular, its oxoammonium
ion form is widely used within synthetic applications as both an electrophile and a mild oxidant. Although many synthetic methods utilize stoichiometric oxidants
to oxidize TEMPO to its oxoammonium ion form, this can also be accomplished
through the disproportionation of two TEMPO radicals to achieve both
the oxoammonium ion and hydroxylamine forms ( Scheme B). This disproportionation is traditionally
driven by a strongly acidic medium of pH < 2; however, the corrosive nature of these strong acids creates
harsh conditions that are incompatible with acid-sensitive substrates.
As such, an increasingly mild strategy toward the disproportionation
of TEMPO would be highly desired.

The application of visible light in organic
synthesis is a powerful
strategy for accomplishing chemical transformations under mild conditions. Photoinduced single-electron transfer (SET),
termed photoredox catalysis, utilizes a chromophore’s excited
redox potential for radical activation. Modern photocatalysts utilize
visible light with high efficiency to bypass the chemical degradation
associated with high-energy ultraviolet light. Although traditional approaches have leveraged heavy metal photocatalysts
due to their strong visible light absorption, long-lived excited states,
and tunable redox potentials, focus has shifted toward economical
and earth-abundant alternatives, such
as organic dyes, which are prized for their homogeneity, chemical
stability, and comparable redox windows. Hence, the application of photoredox catalysis to TEMPO disproportionation
would offer a significantly more mild and compatible condition than
previous acid-driven strategies.

The application of photoredox
catalysis to TEMPO disproportionation
has been proposed by Koike and Akita in
a process that utilizes an iridium photocatalyst to facilitate TEMPO
disproportionation toward the alpha-oxygenation of 1,3-dicarbonyl
compounds ( Scheme A). However, a very similar transformation reported by Tan et al. with Rose Bengal proposes a mechanism independent
of TEMPO disproportionation. Neither of these proposals are supported
by any clarifying mechanistic investigation, which brings into question
the underlying mechanism for this process and merits more comprehensive
analysis. Some reports exist for TEMPO
participating in photocatalytic reactions but only catalytically or
in the presence of stoichiometric oxidants. This report seeks to pair the development of a photoredox-catalyzed
TEMPO disproportionation with a thorough investigation of the mechanism.
This would bypass the traditional requirement for strong acids and
expand the applications of photocatalysis while also clarifying existing
mechanistic incongruities ( Scheme B).

a Electrochemical data
were obtained
from the literature. ,

Electrochemical data
were obtained
from the literature. ,

Herein,
we report the development of photoredox-catalyzed TEMPO
disproportionation applied to an alcohol oxidation system featuring
compatibility with acid-sensitive substrates and mild, sustainable
conditions. This process proceeds efficiently with extremely small
loadings of a widely available organic dye using an inexpensive visible-light
system at room temperature. Detailed mechanistic investigations support
the theory of photoredox-catalyzed TEMPO disproportionation driven
by light energy, successfully bypassing the previous requirement of
a strong acid.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The photocatalyst
4-CzIPN (1,2,3,5-tetrakis­(carbazol-9-yl)-4,6-dicyanobenzene)
( Scheme ) was chosen
for this reaction as a widely available and affordable organic dye
known for its high catalytic efficiency and strong excited redox window
( E 1/2 PC •+ /PC* = -1.16 V vs SCE and E 1/2 PC*/PC •- = +1.50 V vs SCE). Acetonitrile (MeCN) was chosen for its ability
to stabilize charged species and support electron transfer events. Acetic acid (AcOH) was tested as a mild acid
(p K a 4.76 in H 2 O, 23.5 in MeCN) that would not promote TEMPO disproportionation
in the dark.

a Solutions in MeCN.
Emission measured
at 450-650 nm.

Solutions in MeCN.
Emission measured
at 450-650 nm.

To glean photophysical
insight on the optimal photocatalyst loading,
its fluorescence properties were measured. 4-CzIPN was found to have
a local maximum absorbance peak (λ max ) around 365
nm with decreasing absorbance farther into the visible region (see Supporting Information Figure S1 for the absorbance
spectrum). First, it was noted that the emission intensity of 4-CzIPN
was similar for both 365 and 400 nm (see Supporting Information Figure S3 ). Accordingly, the fluorescence of 4-CzIPN
was measured with excitation at 400 nm at various concentrations to
test for the optimal loading to avoid self-quenching ( Scheme ). Fluorescence initially rose
with increased photocatalyst loadings as optimal fluorescence occurred
with 80 μM 4-CzIPN, which corresponds to 0.08 mol % photocatalyst
loading for a reaction mixture with 0.1 M alcohol. The steady decrease
in fluorescence intensity with 4-CzIPN concentrations following 80
μM is rationalized by aggregation-induced self-quenching of
the photocatalyst from intermolecular π-π stacking
which inhibits photonic absorption and increases nonradiative relaxation
pathways.

Accordingly, optimization
began with 0.08 mol % 4-CzIPN with 4-biphenylmethanol
( 1a ) as the model alcohol along with 4 equiv of AcOH
and 2 equiv of TEMPO ( 2a ) in MeCN and an argon atmosphere
at room temperature ( Table , entry 1). Ultimately, these conditions were also found to
be the optimal conditions. First, it was established that a slight
background reaction occurred in the dark, indicating that some oxidation
occurs independent of photocatalysis (entry 2). Next, these conditions
were compared to the wavelengths previously tested in the emission
spectra to correlate product yields against the fluorescence data.
This demonstrated 400 nm as the optimal excitation wavelength (entries
3-4). The decreased yields at 365 nm were hypothesized to be
caused by absorbance from 1a itself from its extended
conjugation. Gratifyingly, the small 0.08 mol % photocatalyst loading
that previously provided optimal emission intensity also provided
optimal product yields when compared to higher, more traditional photocatalyst
loadings (entries 6-8). Furthermore, only a slight background
reaction was observed in the absence of the catalyst (entry 5). Additionally,
varying the amount of AcOH confirmed 4 equiv of AcOH as optimal for
this reaction ( Table , entries 9-12), with the complete absence of AcOH mostly
eliminating reactivity (entry 9). When the amount of TEMPO was surveyed,
2 equiv was found to be optimal (entries 13-15), with the absence
of TEMPO still providing a slight background reaction (entry 13).
Notably, the diminished yields for TEMPO amounts below 2 equiv supports
the idea of TEMPO disproportionation, as only half of the TEMPO present
can provide an oxidation product. (Note that 1 equiv of TEMPO is likely
above 50% due to some background reaction, as seen with 0 equiv in
entry 15). Finally, a decrease in reaction yield is observed under
an ambient atmosphere (entry 16) which is rationalized by the T 1 quenching abilities of molecular oxygen. Accordingly, it was determined that all components are
vital to providing the desired reaction in high yields, with only
slight reactivity observed when one component is absent (entries 2,
5, 9, and 13).

Reactions were carried out on a
0.1 mmol scale.

Reaction
yields were determined
by 1 H NMR of the crude reaction with dibromomethane as
a quantitative internal standard.

Isolated yield on a 0.3 mmol scale
with 3.9 equiv of AcOH in parentheses.

The reaction was run under ambient
air.

With optimized conditions
in hand, the alcohol substrate scope
for this reaction was evaluated ( Table ). Notably, 4-phenylbenzaldehyde ( 3a )
was found to provide a slightly higher yield at the 1.0 mmol scale.
For other benzaldehyde products, the deuterated 4-phenylbenzaldehyde
worked with a slightly lower efficiency to the proton analog ( 3a′ vs 3a ). Naphthaldehydes of both 1-
and 2-substitution were viable, with the 1-naphthaldehyde giving higher
yield, opposite of what might be supposed from steric effects ( 3b - 3c ). Notably, this reaction worked
on protected alcohols (despite the potentially deprotecting presence
of AcOH) such as a catechol-protected diol ( 3d ) as well
as a silane-protected alcohol ( 3e ), thus demonstrating
the compatibility of this method with common alcohol protection strategies.
A number of other functional groups were tolerated within the reaction,
including carboxylic acids ( 3f ), esters ( 3g ), and sulfides ( 3h ), with no oxidation observed on
the latter substrate. However, the production of vanillin ( 3i ) resulted in poor yield, a phenomenon that can be attributed to
chelation by the para-hydroxyl substituent with the oxoammonium ion,
as reported by Stahl. A range of cinnamyl
alcohols were also tested, with all substrates providing elevated
yields with reasonably high E / Z ratios
( 3j - 3n ). Both electron-donating and
electron-withdrawing substituents provided high yields ( 3 k/ 3m vs 3l ), and steric elements on the
system did not prove to be deleterious ( 3n ). Similarly,
both geranial ( 3o ) and farnesal ( 3p ) were
produced in the reaction, with high yield but 1:1 E / Z ratio. Notably, it has been reported that small-molecule
photocatalysts can induce E / Z isomerization
of alkenes by performing energy transfer from the excited triplet
state. Limited aliphatic cases were tested
but resulted in excellent to good yields ( 3q - 3r ). Unfortunately, only select secondary alcohols were compatible
with this reaction, producing minimal reaction yields ( 3s - 3t ). This agrees with previously reported oxidations
of secondary alcohols by oxoammonium ions. , Notably, no ring-opened product was observed in the production of 3t , suggesting the oxidation step in the mechanism does not
involve a radical intermediate (in agreement with previous reports).

Isolated
yields were obtained on
a 0.3 mmol scale.

Starting
from the d 2 -alcohol (99% D ).

Ratio determined by 1 H NMR of the crude reaction starting from the corresponding
>20:1 E / Z alcohols.

In examining the reaction mechanism,
attempts were made to experimentally
verify the occurrence of TEMPO disproportionation through direct observation
of the oxoammonium ion intermediate formed in the reaction ( Scheme A). An experiment
was devised to trap the oxoammonium ion intermediate in an aqueous
phase to isolate it from its precursor radical and hydroxylamine forms
to avoid the thermodynamically favorable comproportionation. As this
oxoammonium salt is strongly water-soluble, unlike its radical and
hydroxylamine forms, MeCN was substituted for denser 1,2-dichloroethane
with water to create a biphasic mixture. Upon 400 nm irradiation for
4 h with AcOH and 4-CzIPN, the aqueous phase was immediately separated
and measured with UV-visible spectroscopy. The resulting UV
absorption spectrum of the aqueous phase strongly agreed with the
spectrum of the oxoammonium ion with possible trace amounts of residual
TEMPO ( Scheme B).
This direct observation of the trapped oxoammonium ion under photocatalytic
conditions provides empirical evidence for the occurrence of TEMPO
disproportionation. Therefore, it was concluded that the formation
of the oxoammonium ion via TEMPO disproportionation was responsible
for alcohol oxidation.

In order to further implicate the importance
of light irradiation
in the reaction, a light on/off experiment was conducted by monitoring
the formation of product 3a under normal reaction conditions
with aliquots taken at the start and end of alternative on/off light
cycles ( Scheme ).
Noticeable reaction progress was observed during the 20 min periods
of light irradiation (0-20 min, 40-60 min, and 80-110
min). Agreeing with previous control experiments, only a very small
background reaction was observed in the 20 min dark periods (20-40
min and 60-80 min). It was concluded that consistent light
exposure was necessary for reaction progress and hypothesized that
a light-initiated cascade/relay process was unlikely.

a Reactions
were carried out on
a 0.3 mmol scale with 1,1,2,2-tetrachloroethane (0.3 mmol) as a quantitative
internal standard. b Product
amounts were determined by solvent-suppressed 1 H NMR of
CDCl 3 -diluted (0.3 mL) aliquots (0.20 mL) at the indicated
times.

Reactions
were carried out on
a 0.3 mmol scale with 1,1,2,2-tetrachloroethane (0.3 mmol) as a quantitative
internal standard.

Product
amounts were determined by solvent-suppressed 1 H NMR of
CDCl 3 -diluted (0.3 mL) aliquots (0.20 mL) at the indicated
times.

After concluding that TEMPO disproportionation
is indeed occurring
and that the reaction is driven by light energy, Stern-Volmer
luminescence quenching analysis was conducted to investigate the mechanistic
role of the photocatalyst and TEMPO. Emission spectroscopy demonstrated
that fluorescence intensity decreased significantly with increased
concentrations of TEMPO (see Supporting Information Figure S5 ). A Stern-Volmer quenching plot was assembled
as a plot of this luminescence quenching vs TEMPO concentration ( Scheme ). Significant luminescence quenching was observed with an
S 1 kinetic quenching constant calculated as k s = 1.47 × 10 10 M -1 s -1 (see Supporting Information , Section 6C). These results demonstrate that rapid S 1 quenching of 4-CzIPN from the excited state by TEMPO is the driving
force behind its disproportionation. Based
on the reported mechanisms of 4-CzIPN in photocatalysis, it is reasonable to surmise that the strong
photoexcited redox potentials of 4-CzIPN allow it to act as an electron
shuttle to perform two sequential, nonspontaneous redox events to
catalyze its disproportionation.

To further eliminate the possibility that AcOH
could be driving
TEMPO disproportionation, the rate order for AcOH was determined through
kinetic analysis. While AcOH is too weak to independently drive disproportionation,
it was hypothesized that AcOH was necessary to promote the kinetics
of photocatalyzed disproportionation by protonating the hydroxylamine
form and slowing the competitive comproportionation. The reaction
rate was graphed against the concentration of AcOH and modeled as
a power fit ( Scheme ). From this, the partial reaction order with respect to AcOH was
determined to be 0.52 (see Supporting Information , Section 8). This substoichiometric partial rate order indicates
an indirect mechanistic role of AcOH. Furthermore, these results demonstrate
that photocatalyzed TEMPO disproportionation differs from traditional
methods in that it is not driven by acid protonation.

The lack of irreversible oxoammonium ion buildup
in solution for
this reaction when alcohol is removed suggests a reversible comproportionation
step. Hence, we theorize the mechanistic role of AcOH is mainly stabilization
of the reduced hydroxylamine anion by protonation to slow the competing
comproportionation process. This would increase the lifetime of the
oxoammonium ion intermediate to kinetically allow its interaction
with the alcohol substrate. Additionally, excess weak acid could shift
the reaction equilibrium to favor TEMPO disproportionation as described
by Le Chatelier’s Principle. It is also possible that AcOH
interacts with the TEMPO radical prior to the initial TEMPO oxidation
event through hydrogen-bonding or direct protonation to reduce the
endergonic barrier of disproportionation, further kinetically promoting
this step. These rationalizations account for both the necessity of
AcOH in the reaction mechanism and its substoichiometric partial rate
order.

A kinetic isotope effect (KIE) study was performed to
investigate
the kinetics of the alcohol oxidation step in the mechanism ( Scheme ). Our findings show
a KIE of 1.32, which aligns with prior reports suggesting that alcohol
oxidation represents the turnover-limiting step. This KIE study and the reversibility of disproportionation
suggest that the reaction becomes irreversible only upon alcohol oxidation
by the oxoammonium ion.

a Reactions were run
on a 0.3 mmol
scale with 1,1,2,2-tetrachloroethane as a quantitative internal standard.

Reactions were run
on a 0.3 mmol
scale with 1,1,2,2-tetrachloroethane as a quantitative internal standard.

To unify the previous analysis, a proposed mechanism
can be formulated
( Scheme ). First,
initial photocatalytic excitation of 4-CzIPN (A) followed by SET with
TEMPO (B) creates the oxoammonium ion and a radical anion form of
4-CzIPN. While photoexcited 4-CzIPN possesses bifunctional redox capabilities,
its higher oxidative potential coupled with the more facile TEMPO
oxidation suggests a more favorable reductive quenching pathway. The
photocatalyst is then regenerated back to the ground state through
oxidation by a second TEMPO radical to yield its hydroxylamine anion
(C), which is stabilized by AcOH protonation (D) (as mentioned previously,
it is possible that AcOH can loosely coordinate to the TEMPO radical
to promote the TEMPO reduction in step C). Finally, an irreversible
and rate-limiting alcohol oxidation by the photochemically generated
oxoammonium ion (E) furnishes the aldehyde and TEMPO hydroxylamine.
This process occurs in competition with comproportionation of the
oxoammonium ion and hydroxylamine anion.

CONCLUSION
This work describes the
development of photoredox-catalyzed TEMPO
disproportionation applied to the oxidation of alcohols. This process
promotes mild and sustainable chemistry using visible light and very
small loadings of an affordable organic dye. In addition to demonstrating
a substrate scope with high yields and functional group tolerance,
significant mechanistic analyses were performed. A small partial reaction
rate order for AcOH (0.52) determined from kinetic analysis, combined
with significant photocatalytic quenching by TEMPO ( k s = 1.47 × 10 10 M -1 s -1 ) determined from Stern-Volmer luminescence
quenching analysis, suggests a reaction mechanism driven by the excited
redox potential of the photocatalyst instead of the p K a of a strong acid. UV-vis studies demonstrated
the presence of the oxoammonium ion under the reaction conditions,
and an alcohol KIE of 1.32 suggests alcohol oxidation is the rate-limiting
step in this mechanism. Future research seeks to explore alternative
applications of the photochemically generated oxoammonium ion as an
electrophile in nucleophilic addition reactions.