ABSTRACT
Abstract Visible-light-promoted
radical reactions have significantly influenced
modern synthetic organic chemistry over the past three decades. In
particular, the dual catalytic methods combining N -heterocyclic carbenes (NHCs) with metal-based (Ir, Ru) photocatalysts
have emerged as a powerful synthetic strategy for efficiently constructing
valuable carbonyl compounds. This synergistic methodology has revealed
great potential in pharmaceutical and materials science applications.
Due to its broad utility, NHC catalysis has recently demonstrated
considerable attention in organic synthesis, materials design, and
the late-stage modifications of drugs and natural products. In this
review, recent advances (2020-2025) in dual NHC and photoredox
catalysis are highlighted, with a particular focus on methodology
developments, mechanistic insights, and the reaction scope for the
synthesis of ketones, esters, and amide derivatives, including pharmaceutically
relevant intermediates. Moreover, this dual catalytic study discusses
current synthetic challenges and opportunities for developing more
efficient and multicatalytic systems and collecting new mechanistic
information under green, sustainable conditions, which tolerate a
broad range of functional groups and commercially available, inexpensive,
nontoxic starting materials or reagents.

INTRODUCTION
Over the past two decades,
visible-light-promoted radical reactions
have been efficiently developed to synthesize organic intermediates,
drugs, and natural products. - Photocatalysis offers sustainable, stereospecific, enantio- and
regioselective green pathways to generate a variety of functionalized
organic molecules using various organo- and metal-type photocatalysts
under mild conditions. - Visible light as a clean and renewable energy source is used for
the development of C-H bond activation. It has driven the recent development of diverse photocatalytic
processes. Among these, the emergence of dual catalysis, particularly
the synergistic combination of N -heterocyclic carbenes
(NHCs) with photocatalysts, has opened new frontiers in molecular
construction, particularly for carbonyl group-containing compounds. - These prevalent functional groups are present in various drugs,
natural products, and bioactive molecules. -

Over the past three decades, N -heterocyclic carbenes
(NHCs) have been recognized as versatile organocatalysts and metal
complexes, including the backbone of imidazolium, thiazolium, and
triazolium derivatives. NHCs are widely used in numerous catalytic
reactions and in the interconversion of functional groups through
the umpolung approach. They can activate several functionalized aryl
aldehydes by forming reactive intermediates such as acyl azoliums,
Breslow intermediates, or homoenolates. - Notably, over the past
ten years, many leading research teams involved in NHC-catalyzed radical
reactions combined with diverse photocatalysts have rapidly developed
various complex catalytic systems to produce pharmaceutically relevant
molecules. The resulting dual or triple catalytic systems enable unprecedented
reactivity and selectivity profiles, facilitating single-electron
transfer (SET) processes under mild conditions when coupled with visible-light-induced
photocatalysis. - These cooperative catalytic systems permit the efficient
and cost-effective generation of carbon-carbon and carbon-heteroatom
bonds through radical pathways that are otherwise difficult to produce
highly functionalized organic molecules using traditional thermal
or single catalytic approaches. -

The combination of NHC and photoredox catalysis
has proven particularly
powerful for the modern photochemical synthesis of structurally diverse
and pharmaceutically important carbonyl compounds, including ketones,
esters, and amides. These motifs are foundational in numerous bioactive
molecules, drugs, natural products, and optical and electronic materials,
making their efficient and selective assembly a root of synthetic
organic chemistry. Moreover, NHC catalysis showed eco-friendly, cost-effective,
mild conditions, high functional group tolerance, and potential for
late-stage functionalization, highlighting this dual catalysis’
synthetic utility and industrial process discovery. Recently, Hopkinson,
Marzo, Wang, Dong, and co-workers reported a detailed synthetic strategy
and mechanistic overview review article of light-promoted dual photocatalysis
combining NHCs with photocatalysts, which includes both organo-and
transition metal photocatalysis for C-C, C-HA cross-coupling
reactions involving various aldehydes, carboxylic acids, esters, acyl
fluorides, amides, and other radical coupling partners, along with
their applications in organic synthesis and medicinal chemistry. -

In 2020, Ohmiya et al. reported significant developments in
NHC-based
radical catalysis, enabling the preparation of various carbonyl compounds
through single-electron transfer (SET) and radical-radical
cross-coupling pathways. Furthermore,
in 2022, Studer et al. published a comprehensive review focused on
radical NHC catalysis, highlighting NHC-catalyzed radical transformations
of aldehydes and carboxylic acid derivatives into a wide range of
carbonyl compounds including ketones, amides, and esters. Radical-radical
coupling reactions were achieved through single-electron oxidation
or reduction processes in the presence of NHC catalysts. Over the years, the research groups of Rovis,
Chi, Glorius, Bode, Enders, Suzuki, Scheidt, and others have developed
C-C, C-HA and H-X cross-coupling strategies enabled
by N -heterocyclic carbene (NHC) catalysis. Later,
dual catalytic approaches that combine NHCs with transition metals
or organocatalysts were discovered, having a major impact on synthetic
organic chemistry. -

The previous review papers focused on recent advances in dual
catalysis
in organic synthesis, particularly visible-light-mediated N -heterocyclic carbene catalysis combined with photocatalysis
involving either metal-based or organocatalysts and also NHC-catalyzed
radical coupling reactions. These strategies have enabled the generation
of diverse organic intermediates via NHC-catalyzed radical reactions. - The review articles by Ohmiya, Studer, and Hopkinson mostly discussed
carbene-catalyzed radical-radical C-C/C-HA cross-coupling
reactions proceeding via single-electron transfer (SET) processes
in the presence of NHC catalysts, with or without a photocatalyst. -
,

This review mainly focuses
on the most recent synthetic applications
in dual photocatalysis reported between 2020 and 2025 for the sustainable
preparation of various carbonyl compounds and their derivatives by
combining NHC organocatalysts with metal-based photoredox catalysts
such as Ir or Ru complexes. The presented NHC-catalyzed dual photocatalytic
approach provides efficient and practical routes for the useful synthesis
of diverse carbonyl compounds and the late-stage functionalization
of bioactive molecules, drugs, and natural products. Moreover, the
use of visible-light harvesting and earth-abundant catalysts is expected
to further expand the impact of this approach in diverse research
areas such as synthetic and medicinal chemistry, pharmaceuticals,
fine chemicals, polymers, and advanced materials. The described NHC-mediated
catalytic methods and reaction scopes are expected to facilitate the
future novel design and development of triple, quadruple, or multicatalytic
systems. -

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Hopkinson and co-workers
efficiently developed a dual NHC and photoredox-catalyzed radical
cross-coupling of aroyl fluorides with benzyl silanes as alkyl radical
sources. The reaction of acyl fluorides 1 with organosilanes 2 in the presence of NHC (20 mol %), Ir-PC (2 mol %), with
Cs 2 CO 3 (1 equiv) in CH 3 CN at room
temperature for 24 h afforded the desired functionalized aryl ketones 3 . Under photoredox conditions, benzyl silanes 2 underwent single-electron oxidation followed by desilylation to
form radical species E . The radical-radical cross-coupling
reaction of intermediates C and E, followed
by the elimination of NHC, finally furnished the corresponding aryl
ketone products 3 . Electron-rich silane substrates reacted
most efficiently under the optimized conditions; however, the authors
also demonstrated that less-activated silyl derivatives, including
primary benzylic substrates, could be successfully coupled. Moreover,
the coupling reaction scope was expanded to include acyl fluorides 1 bearing various functional groups. Notably, organosilane
scaffolds 2 , tolerating N-, O-, and S-heteroatoms, also
underwent the most efficient carbon-carbon cross-coupling reactions.
This dual catalysis study established the broad utility of diverse
organosilane derivatives as suitable substrates for acyl-alkyl
coupling reactions and produced moderate to good yields of highly
substituted ketone moieties 3 ( Scheme ).

In 2024, Han, Li, and their
groups developed the first NHC/Ir-catalyzed
1,2-boron migrative acylation, accelerated by dual photocatalysis
using blue LED. The success of this transformation lies in the novel
design of a unique TCNHPI boronic ester coupling substrate, which
can generate β-boron radical species D through
a single-electron reduction process. This photocatalytic strategy
enables the rapid synthesis of a wide range of β-boryl ketones 6 from aldehyde 4 and TCNHPI boronic ester 5 using NHC (20 mol %), Ir-PC (2 mol %) in a DCM/THF 4:1 ratio
of solvents under mild conditions. The broad applicability of this
strategy was demonstrated via late-stage modifications of bioactive
drugs and natural product scaffolds such as diflunisal, tolmetin,
naproxen, citronellol, ciprofibrate, pterostilbene, and zingerone,
as shown in Scheme . Detailed mechanistic studies, including control experiments, photophysical
analysis, and DFT calculations, were conducted to provide insight
into NHC-catalyzed acylation and the associated 1,2-boron migration
process. The authors proposed a plausible radical pathway in which
the Ir­(III) photocatalyst is excited under visible light irradiation.
The excited-state photocatalyst, Ir­(III)*, then undergoes a single-electron
transfer (SET) with the TCNHPI boronic ester 5 , generating
an alkyl radical species C along with the oxidized photocatalyst
Ir­(IV). The alkyl radical C subsequently undergoes a
facile 1,2-boron migration to form a more stable radical species D . In parallel, aromatic aldehyde 4 condenses
with carbene catalyst A to generate the deprotonated
Breslow intermediate B under basic conditions. This electron-rich
Breslow intermediate then undergoes a SET with the oxidized photocatalyst
Ir­(IV), regenerating the ground-state Ir­(III) species and producing
ketyl radical species E . Alternatively, under thermal
conditions, a direct SET between Breslow intermediate B and TCNHPI ester 5 may occur, forming alkyl radical C , which can similarly convert into the more stable radical D , along with ketyl radical E . A subsequent
radical-radical cross-coupling between species D and E followed by elimination of the carbene catalyst,
furnished the desired carbonyl products 6 ( Scheme ).

In 2023, a robust radical coupling method for
1,2-sulfonylacylation
of allenes, employing inexpensive and readily accessible aroyl fluoride
through visible light-promoted dual photocatalysis by a combination
of NHC and iridium photocatalysts, was reported by Wang et al. This
versatile photocatalytic strategy provides an elegant synthetic approach
for obtaining medicinally useful sulfonyl group-containing allyl ketones
under mild conditions, in a short time (15 min), with excellent regioselectivity.
The respective C-C and C-S coupling reactions between
aroyl fluoride 1 , allene 7 , and sodium sulfonate 8 were achieved using catalytic amounts of NHC and an Ir-photocatalyst
under blue LED irradiation. This method produced the corresponding
vinyl sulfonyl ketones 9 in good yields with tolerance
of a wide range of functional groups and accessible starting materials.
Mechanistic investigations indicated that the 1,2-sulfonylacylation
step proceeded through an unprecedented cross-coupling of a triazolium-carbene-stabilized
ketyl radical C and an allyl radical B ,
which opened a new avenue for the radical difunctionalization of allene
derivatives via dual photocatalysis ( Scheme ).

Wu et al. developed a new dual
catalytic method that combines NHC
catalysis with Ir-photocatalysis under mild conditions for the useful
carbonylation of alkenes 12 , allowing the efficient synthesis
of valuable 1,4-dicarbonyl compounds 13 in good yields.
In this transformation, three new C-C bonds and two carbonyl
(CO) groups were constructed in a one-pot process with a broad substrate
scope and tolerance of various functional groups. Furthermore, the
synthetic practicality of the approach was demonstrated through the
effective construction of important heterocyclic compounds such as
furan, pyrrole, and pyridazine, as well as 1,4-diol derivatives. This
method offers new insights into NHC-photoredox-catalysis-driven
multicatalytic systems design for CO utilization under economical
and sustainable conditions ( Scheme ).

Wang et al. reported an effective
photocatalytic strategy involving
NHC and photoredox iridium cocatalysis for the three-component symmetrical
and unsymmetrical 1,2-dicarbonylation of olefins, aroyl fluorides,
and α-keto acids under extremely mild conditions using readily
available starting materials. The visible light-mediated multicomponent
reaction of functionalized alkenes 12 , acyl fluorides 1 , and α-keto acids 14 were carried out
in the presence of carbene catalyst (15 mol %), Ir-photocatalyst (1.5
mol %), and Cs 2 CO 3 as a base in a MeOH/H 2 O solvent system at 30 °C for 12 h under green
system, affording the desired 1,2-dicarbonylated products 15 in up to 88%. Mechanistic experiments indicated that the transformation
proceeds via a radical cross-coupling pathway. The
distinct reactivity of the acyl radical and the NHC-stabilized ketyl
radical enabled excellent selectivity. The authors successfully developed
a regioselective method for the 1,2-dicarbonylation of alkenes with
two different aroyl and alkanoyl groups. This novel catalytic procedure
represents a significant advancement in the selective multicomponent
coupling of 1,2-dicarbonylation of alkenes, enabling the installation
of both aroyl and alkanoyl functionalities. The radical transformation
proceeds under mild conditions with broad substrate scope and tolerating
various functional groups, offering a general and practical strategy
for the synthesis of both symmetrical and unsymmetrical 1,2-dicarbonyl
compounds 15 ( Scheme ).

In 2022, a new photocatalytic method was developed
for
the direct
1,2-dicarbonylation of alkenes via cooperative NHC
and iridium photocatalysis to access 1,4-dicarbonyl compounds 17 reported by Fan, Feng, and co-workers. The radical reaction
was carried out between olefins 16 and aroyl fluorides 1 in the presence of NHC (10 mol %), Ir-based photocatalyst
(1.5 mol %), and Ph 3 P (1.5 equiv) in Cs 2 CO 3 (2 equiv) in DCM for 24 h. Visible-light-induced NHC involved
catalytic process enabled the facile synthesis of a series of symmetric
1,4-diketones 17 in 41-79% yield, with a broad
substrate scope and excellent functional group tolerance. Furthermore,
unsymmetric diketones were formed readily by varying the acyl and
alkene precursors through three-component coupling of amide, benzoic
acid, and alkene combination. This method exhibits remarkable generality
and offers potential for late-stage modification of therapeutically
relevant arenes and heteroarenes ( Scheme ).

Wang and colleagues developed a cost-effective,
convenient method
for the efficient synthesis of difluoromethylated ketones 19 via a three-component coupling reaction of olefins 12 , aldehydes 4 , and 2-((difluoromethyl)­sulfonyl)­benzo­[d]­thiazole 18 under NHC-Ir photoredox catalysis. The reaction was achieved
with Na 2 CO 3 (1.5 equiv) in the presence of an
Ir-based photocatalyst (1 mol %), carbene catalyst (20 mol %), and
450 nm blue LED irradiation. This dual photocatalysis strategy enabled
the simultaneous incorporation of a difluoromethyl moiety known for
its enhanced biological activity and a carbonyl group into substituted
olefins 12 . The method showed a broad substrate scope
and was compatible with various aromatic aldehydes and alkenes under
sustainable conditions. Moreover, its utility was demonstrated by
the successful late-stage functionalization of therapeutic agents
and drug-like molecules, which produce numerous physiological effects,
including antipyretic, anti-inflammatory, analgesic, etc. Further
investigations into the NHC-mediated radical coupling process are
expected to expand its synthetic applicability across diverse areas
of chemistry ( Scheme ).

Chi and co-workers recently developed a convenient
and straightforward
method for the synthesis of aryl alkyl ketones 22 through
radical-radical cross-coupling of carboxylic acids 20 and acids/acyl imidazoles 21 by merging NHC and metal
photocatalysis. The acyl imidazoles can be readily generated in situ
via the reaction of a carboxylic acid with CDI (carbonyldiimidazole),
providing an effective method for the streamlined photochemical synthesis
of a series of ketone moieties 22 from two distinct carboxylic
acids (aryl or alkyl groups). The mild reaction conditions, operational
simplicity, and readily available carboxylic acids as both acyl sources
and radical precursors make this synthetic approach more versatile
and convenient. Moreover, this methodology could be suitable for modifying
various natural products, pharmacological agents, and their fragments,
including nalidixic acid, fluorbiprofen, indoprofen, ketoprofen, naproxen,
etc. Remarkably, this method was further extended for the NHC-catalyzed
cross-coupling three-component reaction by the addition of an alkene
moiety as a third coupling partner under mild conditions, enabling
the rapid assembly of structurally complex carbonyl products from
simple, commercially available acids and alkenes ( Scheme ).

Studer and his groups reported a visible light-mediated
fluoro-aroylation
of benzofuran, indole scaffolds 23 via cooperative NHC and iridium photoredox catalysis, achieved using
catalytic amounts of NHC (20 mol %) and iridium catalysts (2 mol %)
with the addition of K 2 HPO 4 (2 equiv) and 5
W blue LED irradiation. Acyl fluorides 1 acted as bifunctional
reagents, enabling the incorporation of the aroyl group and a fluoride
moiety into benzofuran derivatives 24 . Based on these
experimental results and previous literature reports, Studer et al.
proposed a plausible mechanistic pathway for the formation of the
O-heterocyclic product 24 via radical cross-coupling
between an NHC-bound radical intermediate B and a benzofuran
radical species C . Upon blue LED irradiation, benzofuran 23 ( E 1/2 = 1.28 V vs SCE) is oxidized
to its radical cation C by photoexcited Ir­(III)*. On
the other hand, the reaction of acyl fluorides 1 with
the NHC furnishes the acyl azolium ion A ( E 1/2 = -1.29 V vs SCE), which is reduced by Ir­(II)
( E 1/2 (P/P •- )
= -1.37 V vs SCE) to regenerate Ir­(III) with the formation
of the persistent NHC-connected ketyl radical B . This
photocatalytic strategy displayed a broad substrate scope and a good
functional group tolerance. Moreover, N -acyl indoles
were found to be suitable substrates for the dearomative 2,3-difunctionalization
of the indole moiety. The synthetic scope of this method was further
demonstrated by showing that anhydrides can also serve as alternative
bifunctional reagents in the difunctionalization of benzofuran scaffolds.
In addition, mechanistic investigations indicated that these transformations
proceed via a rare radical-radical cation
cross-coupling reaction, which serves as a key step in this method
( Scheme ).

Wang et al. described the most efficient 1,4-sulfonylacylation
of 1,3-enynes 25 and acyl fluoride 1 by
merging N -heterocyclic carbene (NHC) with photocatalysis
under blue LED irradiation. This photocatalytic transformation offers
a facile and direct approach to tetrasubstituted allenyl ketone derivatives 26 under sustainable conditions, exhibiting excellent chemo-
and regioselectivity. This method is compatible with a wide range
of functional groups and is suitable for late-stage functionalization
of drug molecules including cholesterol derivatives, mefenamic acid,
telmisartan, etc. Mechanistic investigations revealed that the key
step involves radical-radical cross-coupling between allenyl
and ketyl radicals, providing a novel pathway in NHC-catalyzed reactions.
The stable ketyl radical was generated from acyl fluorides via oxidative
quenching of the excited photocatalyst. This method holds potential
for the late-stage modification of various pharmaceuticals and bioactive
compounds ( Scheme ).

The acylative Suzuki-type
cross-coupling of aroyl fluorides and
alkyl trifluoroborates system was reported by Li and co-workers by
merging NHC catalysis and photoredox catalysis. Using this novel dual
catalytic strategy, a broad spectrum of aryl methyl ketones was efficiently
prepared from readily available starting materials under mild conditions.
The radical reaction was performed between aroyl fluorides 1 and alkyl trifluoroborates 27 in the presence of catalytic
amounts of a carbene catalyst (15 mol %) and an Ir-based photocatalyst
(2 mol %) under blue LED irradiation to afford corresponding ketone
products 28 in high yields, including a variety of electron-rich
and electron-poor functional groups, such as F, Cl, Br, Me, and OMe.
To further demonstrate the generality of the method, catalytic acylation
of silyl group attached carbazoles 29 with acyl fluoride 1 was also successfully carried out. In addition, possible
mechanistic investigations were conducted to elucidate the unique
sequential energy transfer and single-electron transfer activation
pathway, including cyclic voltammetry analyses, photophysical experiments,
and computational simulations ( Scheme ).

Wang et al. discovered that dual NHC/photoredox
synergistically
catalyzed the aminoalkylacylation of alkenes 12 with
α-silyl amines 31 and benzyl fluorides 1 in the presence of NHC (20 mol %) and Ir catalyst (1 mol %) and
furnished the γ-aminoketones in moderate yields. This approach
displayed excellent functional group tolerance and easily accessible
starting materials and provided straightforward access to a diverse
range of γ-aminoketones 32 under mild reaction
conditions. The utility of this method was further demonstrated through
the late-stage functionalization of biologically active compounds
and pharmaceutical drugs ( Scheme ).

A visible light-promoted radical
cross-coupling method was developed
for the preparation of the corresponding α-amino aryl ketones 34 from carboxylic acids or amides 33 via dual catalysis reported by Wang and co-workers. The
combination of NHC and Ir-photoredox catalysis permits the single-electron
reduction of acyl azolium intermediates, followed by radical-radical
coupling to efficiently construct a C-C bond, yielding the
desired bioactive α-amino ketones 34 in good yields.
This catalytic method employs simple operation or readily available
aromatic acid 10 and functionalized amine derivatives 33 and exhibits broad substrate scope and good functional
group tolerance under eco-friendly conditions. The corresponding α-amino
ketones were further transformed into a terminal olefin through a
Wittig reaction, an α-amino alcohol through NaBH 4 reduction, and α-amino oximes using hydroxylamine under standard
conditions ( Scheme ).

Scheidt and co-workers outlined
this approach via hypothesis-driven
experimentation guided by computational investigation. In addressing
a standard limitation of single-electron carbene processes, the authors
provided mechanistic insights that could advance this catalytic platform,
expand the substrate scope, and accelerate the utility of NHCs in
molecular design and synthesis. The modularity of these single-electron
operators involved in a dual catalysis by combined NHC-catalysis and
metal-based photoredox catalytic method for preparing aliphatic ketones 37 from carboxylic acids 35 or amide 10 in the presence of silicon reagents 36 . By modulating
the steric and electronic parameters of the NHC, they achieved increased
yields of up to 65% compared to their previously reported results.
Moreover, they significantly expanded the reaction scope by directly
functionalizing readily available amino acids to obtain the corresponding
α-amino ketone scaffolds 37 through a one-pot procedure.
The utility of this method was further demonstrated through the late-stage
functionalization of biologically active agents and pharmaceutical
drugs ( Scheme ).

In 2020, the groups of Scheidt, Chen, and co-workers
demonstrated
a photocatalytic method for effectively preparing ketones 37a from amide 10 and amino ester 38 via dual
photocatalysis merging NHC and iridium catalysts, leading to the formation
of highly functionalized carbonyl compounds with a wide range of synthetic
utility and pharmaceutical applications. This method summarizes the
potential of incorporating radical processes into NHC catalysis. Bioactive
carbonyl molecules and drug-like compounds were synthesized from derivatives
of dehydrocholic acid, micardis, and prandin using an NHC catalyst
(15 mol %) and a photocatalyst (1 mol %) under visible-light irradiation.
NHC-derived acyl azolium and alkyl radical intermediates were expected
to find significant synthetic applications in NHC-catalyzed asymmetric
reactions and related biological studies. This method operates under
mild conditions and tolerates sensitive functional groups well. Remarkably,
the NHC involved photocatalytic strategy applies to the late-stage
derivatization of various bioactive organic intermediates, producing
a valuable tool for conveniently synthesizing biobased products ( Scheme ).

A three-component
coupling strategy was developed by Studer et
al. for the convenient synthesis of β-trifluoromethylated aryl
ketones via NHC-catalyzed coupling reactions involving radical intermediates.
The respective radical reaction involved cross-coupling of aroyl fluorides 1 , olefins 12 , and the Langlois reagent (CF 3 SO 2 Na) 39 under the described method,
which furnished the corresponding various β-trifluoromethylated
ketones 40 in good yields up to 88% with excellent functional
group tolerance achieved through cooperative photoredox/NHC catalysis.
The coupling reaction was conducted using a catalytic amount of NHC
(20 mol %) and an Ir-based photocatalyst (2 mol %) in DCM under photochemical
conditions. Studer and co-workers proposed a visible-light-mediated
dual photocatalytic approach for alkene acyltrifluoromethylation,
which proceeds via a domino-type carbon radical coupling between the
NHC-bound ketyl radical B and the benzylic radical D . Upon blue LED irradiation, the excited state of [Ir­(ppy) 2 (dtbbpy)]­PF 6 undergoes a well-known reductive quenching
by the trifluoromethanesulfinate anion 39 , producing
the corresponding Ir­(II) complex [ E 1/2 (Ir 3+ /Ir 2+ ) = -1.51 V vs SCE] and the
trifluoromethylsulfonyl radical C , which subsequently
fragments to release SO 2 and generate the trifluoromethyl
radical D . The resulting Ir­(II) complex then reduces
the acylazolium intermediate A ( E 1/2 = -1.29 V vs SCE) via a single-electron transfer
(SET) process. The acylazolium intermediate, generated in
situ from aroyl fluorides 1 and the NHC, affords
the persistent ketyl radical B along with regeneration
of the Ir­(III) complex, thereby closing the photoredox cycle ( Scheme ).

In 2025, Dong and Wang et al. developed an NHC-catalyzed
cross-coupling
reaction involving arylated alkenes 12 , amides 10 , and 1,3-benzodioxole 41 as coupling reagents,
and also serving as the solvent. Visible-light-mediated dual catalysis
enabled the practical and novel synthesis of highly substituted ketone
scaffolds 42 in the presence of NHC (10 mol %) and an
Ir-photocatalyst (2 mol %) under sustainable conditions. This practical
method was successfully applied to the late-stage functionalization
of bioactive molecules and drugs. The approach features mild reaction
conditions, excellent selectivity, operational simplicity, broad functional
group compatibility, and scalability ( Scheme ).

In 2025, Chi et al. developed a novel NHC-mediated
photocatalytic
method for benzyl alcohol para -selective C-H
acylation. The C-C cross-coupling reaction proceeds through
cooperative NHC and Ir-photoredox catalysis. Benzyl and arylethyl
alcohols 43 were selectively acylated at the para -position of the phenyl ring, affording the corresponding
variety of diaryl ketones 45 bearing a carbamate moiety.
Combined experimental and computational mechanistic studies support
the proposed reaction pathway and reveal exclusive para -selective C­(sp 2 )-H acylation. The NHC-catalyzed
direct aryl C-H functionalization strategy is expected to find
broad applications in synthetic and medicinal organic chemistry ( Scheme ).

Chi et al. developed a cooperative NHC and Ir-photocatalyzed
approach
for the convenient synthesis of 3-acylated N -methylindoles,
from indole 46 , amide 10 and provided an
efficient method for structurally diverse 3-acylindoles via NHC catalysis.
The presented dual catalytic approach enables the synthesis of various
substituted 3-benzoylindoles 47 and several analogs of
aldose reductase inhibitors, demonstrating the potential utility of
this acylation strategy. Some of the obtained 3-acylindole derivatives
exhibited notable antibacterial activities. A series of 3-acylindoles
was achieved via aryl radical cations reacting with NHC-bound ketyl
radicals. This work will find various applications and further challenge
synthetic chemists ( Scheme ).

Han et al. developed NHC-catalyzed regioselective
bis-acylation
of alkenes by merging NHC organocatalysis and Ir-photoredox catalysis.
The reaction of alkenes 12 , ketoacids 48 , and amides 10 in the presence of catalytic amounts
of an NHC catalyst and an iridium photocatalyst in 1,2-DEC at 60 °C
for 12 h afforded a broad range of 1,4-diketones 49 in
good yields using readily available starting materials, a wide range
of functional group tolerance, and under mild conditions. Interestingly,
the 1,4-dicarbonyl products could be readily converted into various
heterocyclic compounds such as substituted furans, pyrroles, and pyridazines.
Moreover, mechanistic experiments supported understanding this NHC
and photoredox dual catalytic radical cascade coupling process ( Scheme ).

Zhao et al. discovered a dual-catalyzed radical
alkene aminoacylation
reaction of compound 50 and amide 10 via
cooperative NHC and photoredox catalysis under blue LED irradiation
conditions. Hydrazones single-electron transfer (SET) oxidation produces
an N-centered hydrazonyl radical intermediate, which undergoes regioselective
6-endo-trig cyclization as a key step. This method efficiently produced
diverse 1,4,5,6-tetrahydropyridazines 51 in moderate
to good yields, exhibiting excellent functional group tolerance under
mild reaction conditions ( Scheme ).

Feng et al. described a novel strategy for the
trifunctionalization
of unactivated alkenes via a combined NHC/Ir-dual photocatalytic radical
relay alkylacylation in the presence of acid 20 , alkene 52 and sodium trifluoromethanesulfinate 8 under
mild conditions. The NHC-catalyzed cross-coupling reaction was carried
out using catalytic amounts of NHC (15 mol %) and an Ir-based photocatalyst
(5 mol %) in 1,2-DCE at rt for 24 h under photochemical conditions.
This approach provides an efficient strategy for molecular framework
construction, involving multistep C-C bond formation and cleavage
through remote 1,4-cyano migration and alkylacylation. Additionally,
theoretical calculations and mechanistic studies supported the proposed
mechanism and explained the regioselectivity of the 1,4-CN migration
( Scheme ).

Sun and Zheng et al. reported an efficient dual
catalytic radical
1,4-mono/difluoromethylative acylation of 1,3-enynes by combining
NHC organocatalysis and Ir-photocatalysis. This transformation proceeds
under mild conditions using bench-stable and commercially available
Hu’s reagents, CFH 2 SO 2 Na or CF 2 HSO 2 Na, as fluoromethyl radical sources. The reaction
of Hu’s reagents 55 and 1,3-enynes 54 with readily available benzoyl fluorides 1 as acylation
partners, providing direct access to value-added -CFH 2 - and -HCF 2 -containing allene ketone scaffolds 56 . The key step of the transformation involves a cross-coupling between
allenyl and ketyl radicals enabled by dual photocatalysis ( Scheme ).

Ren et al. developed
a step- and atom-economical synthetic protocol
for the facile synthesis of valuable α-indole methyl ketones 58 from 3-methylindole 57 . The NHC-catalyzed
coupling reaction proceeds via the direct acylation of indole methyl
C­(sp 3 )-H bonds under dual NHC and photoredox catalysis
under mild conditions. This approach enables the efficient synthesis
of both α-2-indolyl methyl ketones and α-3-indolyl methyl
ketones by simply switching between 2- and 3-alkyl indole substrates.
The successful synthesis of α-indole methyl ketones highlights
their potential applications in the synthesis of biologically active
indole-based natural products and heterocyclic compounds ( Scheme ).

Recently, Wang et
al. reported a visible-light-mediated alkylacylation
of vinylarenes 12 with tertiary arylamines 59 and acyl fluorides 1 for the efficient synthesis of
γ-aminoketones 60 under sustainable conditions
in good yields. The presented dual catalytic method employs an NHC
catalyst (20 mol %) and a photoredox catalyst (2 mol %) under mild
conditions. This reaction demonstrates good functional group tolerance
and utilizes readily available starting materials. Furthermore, a
wide range of γ-aminoketones bearing a quaternary center were
obtained via radical coupling using dual catalysis ( Scheme ).

In 2025, Jin et al.
developed a green and mild dual catalytic system
by merging photoredox/NHC catalysis to enable the efficient synthesis
of structurally diverse α-N-aryl amino ketone scaffolds 62 in good yields via radical-radical coupling between N -methyl radicals and persistent radical species derived
from NHC intermediates. This method exhibits excellent compatibility
with both secondary and tertiary arylamine substrates. Moreover, NHC-mediated
radical transformations offer a green and sustainable approach to
access α-N-aryl amino ketone derivatives ( Scheme ).

In 2023, an innovative
photocatalytic method was developed for the elegant synthesis of 3-benzoylbicyclo[1.1.1]­pentane-1-acetates 65 through a three-component coupling reaction of aldehydes 4 , [1.1.1]­propellane 63 , and diazoalkanes 64 , enabled by cooperative NHC and iridium cocatalysis described
by Jiang and his team. The visible-light-promoted radical C-C
cross-coupling reaction for the synthesis of functionalized bicyclo[1.1.1]­pentanes
(BCPs) 65 in good yields was carried out using an NHC
catalyst (15 mol %), an iridium photocatalyst (2.5 mol %), and DMAP
(50 mol %) under 456 nm blue LED irradiation for 12 h. This study
highlights the method's operational simplicity, high atom economy,
and broad substrate scope, providing a powerful photochemical method
for constructing 1,3-disubstituted BCP ketones from readily available
starting materials using nontoxic reagents/catalysts. These compounds
will find broad synthetic applicability of BCP-type bioisosteres in
medicinal chemistry ( Scheme ).

Wang and co-workers demonstrated carbene and
iridium photoredox
cocatalyzed alkylacylation of alkenes 12 in the presence
of DMAP (50 mol %), using aryl aldehyde 4 and alkyl diazo
ester 64 . This strategy offers a novel approach for transient
radical generation, producing nitrogen gas (N 2 ) as the
only byproduct, a green and environmentally benign process. The developed
radical cross-coupling reaction afforded acyl ester scaffolds 66 in excellent yields under extremely mild conditions, employing
NHC (15 mol %) and photoredox catalyst (1 mol %), with a broad substrate
scope and good functional group tolerance. Notably, this radical reaction
involved a multicomponent reaction that utilized traditional carbene
precursors, diazo esters, as radical sources, preparing the first
report of such a radical process in NHC organocatalysis. Compared
with previously reported mechanistic pathways that generate radicals
and large waste fragments, this dual catalytic protocol exhibits excellent
atom economy. It represents a more sustainable synthetic application
in pharmaceutical chemistry ( Scheme ).

Jiang et al. outlined
an NHC/photosensitization relay catalytic
methodology that enables photoinduced energy transfer of an NHC-bound
intermediate D to furnish the desired ( Z )-allylic fluorides 68 with excellent stereochemical
control and high yields using NHC (10 mol %), Ir-PC (1 mol %), in
the presence of Selectfluor (fluoride source). The synthesis of α-fluoro
alkenyl ester moiety 68 from conjugated aldehyde 67 was systematically investigated, highlighting the influence
of NHC catalysts and Ir-based photosensitizers. Resulting in a highly
enantioselective α-fluorination step, the key ( E )-acyl azolium species E underwent in situ photoisomerization
before NHC turnover. It is proposed that π-π interactions
between the NHC and alkene moiety may enhance asymmetric induction,
and the choice of iridium photocatalyst plays a critical role in regulating
the rate and stage of isomerization. This unprecedented synergy between
photosensitization and NHC-based organocatalysis offers unique advantages
for accessing thermodynamically disfavored alkene isomers, particularly
in systems bearing various sensitive functional groups ( Scheme ).

Studer and co-workers
reported a convenient and novel catalytic
method for the 1,3-difunctionalization of arylated cyclopropanes using
NHC/Ir-based cooperative photoredox catalysis. This method enables
sequential C-O and C-C bond formation, affording a variety
of γ-aroyloxy ketone analogs 71 in good yields
with broad functional group tolerance and substrate scope. The dual
catalytic approach employed between cyclopropanes 69 with
anhydrides 70 using triazolium-based carbene catalyst
(10 mol %) and an Ir-photocatalyst (2.5 mol %) in the presence of
Cs 2 CO 3 and 1,2-dichloroethane as the best choice
of solvent. Mechanistic investigations disclosed that the cascade
proceeds through nucleophilic ring-opening of an aryl cyclopropyl
radical cation C , followed by radical-radical
cross-coupling B and D as key intermediates
for producing keto esters 71 . Notably, the authors found
that 1,2,3,5-tetrakis­(carbazol-9-yl)-4,6-dicyanobenzene (4CzIPN) organocatalyst
was found to be the best choice for employing the catalytic reaction
of acyl fluorides 1 and substituted cyclopropane 69 . This approach holds high potential for applications in
medicinal activity and active pharmaceutical ingredients ( Scheme ).

Huo et al. reported
a mild and straightforward system for the NHC/photoredox
dual-catalytic method for the α-carboxylation of N -aryl tetrahydroisoquinolines 72 and tertiary amine
C­(sp 3 )-H bonds using diethyl pyrocarbonate (DEPC) 73 . This approach provides a novel route for the synthesis
of α-amino acid derivatives 74 . The method exhibits
a broad substrate scope and simple starting materials, accommodating
both N-aryl tetrahydroisoquinolines (THIQs) and N -methylanilines. It also works well in large-scale reactions. Additionally,
this method is applied to the late-stage modification of various drugs
and pharmaceutical compounds ( Scheme ).

Yang et al. presented an NHC/photoredox-catalyzed
radical cross-coupling reaction for constructing α-keto amide
derivatives, offering a complementary approach to classical two-electron
processes. The decarboxylative acylation of oxamic acids 75 with acyl fluorides 1 enables the synthesis of a wide
range of useful α-keto amides 76 using NHC (20
mol %), Ir-PC (2 mol %) and Cs 2 CO 3 (2 equiv)
in DCM for 24 h under eco-friendly conditions, displaying good functional
groups tolerance including Me, OMe, Br, I, CF 3 , CO 2 Me. Mechanistic investigations revealed that the C­(sp 2 )-C­(sp 2 ) bond formation occurs via a radical-radical
cross-coupling between a carbamoyl radical and an NHC-derived ketyl
radical. This method represents the first example of a carbene-catalyzed
two-component radical cross-coupling involving C­(sp 2 )-centered
radical intermediates. Compared to previously reported methods based
on electron-pair mechanisms, this strategy offers a distinct advantage
in accessing sterically hindered α-keto amide scaffolds 76 in moderate to good yields ( Scheme ).

Shu and co-workers presented
a visible-light-promoted NHC/Ru-catalyzed three-component coupling
reaction of alkenes, disulfides, and alkenes, which afforded the corresponding
β-thiolated-α-arylated ketones 78 at room
temperature. The radical-radical cross-coupling proceeded using
a thiazolium-based NHC (10 mol %) and a Ru catalyst (2 mol %) in the
presence of KOAc, with DMSO as polar solvent under 30 W blue LED irradiation.
This NHC-catalyzed method allows the sequential addition of sulfides 77 to alkenes 12 and aldehydes 4 through rapid C-S and C-C bond formation. This catalytic
approach demonstrates excellent functional group tolerance, enables
the functionalization of drug-like molecules under mild conditions,
and affords direct access to β-thiolated-α-arylated ketones 78 from readily available starting materials. This photocatalysis
also applies to the late-stage functional groups derivatization of
therapeutic agents and bioactive organic compounds ( Scheme ).

In 2021, Shu and co-workers
reported, for the first time, a visible-light-mediated
NHC-catalyzed vinylation of aromatic aldehydes at ambient temperature.
This method relies on a site-selective and regioselective 2-fold sequential
C-H cross-functionalization. The reaction carried out between
an alkene 79 and an aromatic aldehyde 4 ,
in the presence of NHC (10 mol %), photocatalyst (2 mol %), Cs 2 CO 3 as base, and TTBDPB (1.9 equiv) under the presented
conditions, efficiently afforded vinyl ketones 80 in
high yield. The described photochemical reaction displays a broad
range of functional group tolerance, accepting various electron-withdrawing
and -donating aldehydes and functionalized alkenes. Mechanistic studies
indicated that the transformation proceeds through radical-radical
cross-coupling reactions. This NHC catalysis relay method represents
a promising platform for developing visible-light-promoted NHC and
Ru-catalyzed carbon-carbon and carbon-heteroatom bond-forming
reactions under sustainable conditions ( Scheme ).

Wang and co-workers developed a convenient method
for the preparation
of α-aryl-β-monofluoromethyl ketones 82 via a three-component difunctionalization of alkenes through
dual catalysis by combining NHC/photoredox catalysts. A wide range
of alkenes 12 and aroyl fluorides 1 were
successfully studied, demonstrating good functional group tolerance
and the use of readily available starting materials. The activation
of a bench-stable and readily accessible fluorinating reagent (NaSO 2 CH 2 F) was achieved using a Ru-photocatalyst to
generate the CH 2 F radical via single-electron oxidation,
without the need for external oxidants. The late-stage functionalization
of diverse bioactive drug molecules and natural products further demonstrated
the synthetic utility of this strategy ( Scheme ).

NHC-catalyzed C-C bond
cleavage of γ-cyclopropane enals 83 followed by
γ-alkylation via a radical process under photoredox
dual catalysis was reported by Ye and co-workers. A variety of halogenated
alkylating reagents 84 were successfully employed. The
dual photocatalysis involved an NHC catalyst (10 mol %) and a Ru-based
photocatalyst (2.5 mol %), performed in the presence of various alcohols
in DCE at rt for 12 h. α-Bromomalonates bearing various substituents
such as cyano, ester, allyl, and nitro groups were tolerated well,
giving the corresponding γ-alkylated α,β-unsaturated
esters 85 in up to 95%. The reaction proceeds by adding
an alkyl radical to NHC-bound conjugated alkene intermediates, subsequent
single-electron transfer oxidation of homoenolate radical, and finally
reaction with alcohols to afford the corresponding ester products.
The reaction features exclusive γ-regioselectivity, a broad
range of functional group tolerance, reaction simplicity, and mild
reaction conditions ( Scheme ).

Xu et al. presented the remote
benzylation of γ-alkenyl-γ-oxidized
enals via cooperative photoredox and NHC catalysis, affording an array
of ε-benzylation products 88 in up to a 69% yield.
The reaction was carried out using an NHC catalyst (20 mol %) and
a Ru-based photocatalyst (5 mol %) under visible-light irradiation
in the presence of conjugated aldehyde 86 , alkyl bromide 87 , and various alcohols, under mild conditions. In this C-C
cross-coupling reaction, the benzylic radical was generated through
photoinduced single-electron reduction of benzyl bromide 87 . At the same time, trienolate intermediate B , derived
from the corresponding γ-alkenyl-γ-oxidized enal under
NHC catalysis, played a key role. The benzylic radical D selectively added to the ε-position of the trienolate intermediate B to form species C followed by the elimination
of the NHC catalyst to produce the conjugated ester 88 via SET. This catalytic system exhibited various functional group
tolerance, accepting electron-donating, electron-withdrawing, and
steric substituents on the aryl ring and also verified various alcoholic
substrates ( Scheme ).

In 2020, Dai et al. described an unprecedented
γ-difluoroalkylation
of γ-preoxidized enals via cooperative photoredox and NHC catalysis.
The photocatalytic reaction of α,β-unsaturated aldehyde 89 with difluorinated alkyl halides 90 , in the
presence of an NHC catalyst (10 mol %) and a Ru-photocatalyst (2 mol
%) using CsOAc as a base, using a variety of alcohols, afforded the
desired ester products 91 in good yields. Bromo- and
iodosubstituted difluoroacetates and difluoroamides worked well in
this transformation. The key step of this C-C cross-coupling
reaction involves the conjugated addition of a difluoroalkyl radical B , generated under photoredox conditions, to the dienolate
intermediate A formed via NHC catalysis. Subsequently,
radical-radical cross-coupling and subsequent addition to various
alcohols offer γ-difluoroalkylated α,β-unsaturated
esters 91 . This strategy allows efficient construction
of C­(sp 3 )-CF 2 R bonds at the γ-position
of carbonyl compounds, offering a novel approach for the cost-effective
preparation of γ-difluoroalkylated α,β-unsaturated
esters 91 and amides bearing all-carbon quaternary centers
( Scheme ).

CONCLUSION
This
review focused mainly on visible-light-mediated dual photocatalysis
merging NHC organocatalysts and Ir/Ru photoredox catalysts as a groundbreaking
recent radical method allowing the highly efficient and regioselective
construction of a broad range of highly functionalized carbonyl compounds,
including ketones, esters, and amides. These catalytic strategies
also facilitate the late-stage functionalization of drug-like molecules,
natural products, and bioactive compounds under mild conditions, products
exhibiting excellent functional group tolerance, available starting
materials, high yields of products, an atom-economical process, and
operational simplicity. Highly substituted ketones, esters, and amide
scaffolds derived via these photochemical transformations from easily
accessible starting materials have shown significant potential in
pharmaceutical, agrochemical, and materials science applications.
This review highlights recent developments in NHC-catalyzed radical
cross-coupling processes over the past six years (2020-2025),
discussing dual catalytic method design and their novel synthetic
applications, electronic and steric influences of the catalysts, mechanistic
insights, and current limitations related to functional group compatibility.
Additionally, the described methods are compatible with sensitive
functional groups on drugs, natural products, and bioactive compounds.
The presented NHC and Ir/or Ru-mediated catalytic methods and reaction
scopes are expected to facilitate the future design and development
of novel triple, quadruple, or multicatalytic systems as well as support
the green modification and construction of medicinally and pharmaceutically
active molecules.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Vasudevan Dhayalan
expresses his appreciation to DST-SERB
for an ANRF-Core Research Grant (CRG/2022/001855), and to the National
Institute of Technology Puducherry, Karaikal, India for their research
support.

SECTION
The entire
manuscript was written by VD.

SECTION
The
author declares no
competing financial interest.