SMALL MOLECULE REACTIONS IN FLOW
The chemical literature
is rich with examples of the synthesis
of small molecules using flow chemistry, and this special issue is
no exception. Providing an excellent overview, Ackermann and co-workers
discuss the literature on continuous-flow electro- and photocatalyzed
C-H functionalization in their timely Perspective (DOI: 10.1021/jacsau.5c01706 ). In parallel, Lim, Richards, Su and co-workers present their perspective
of the field of continuous flow photocatalysis, covering system architectures,
the mode of photocatalyst deployment, and their views on future directions
in the field (DOI: 10.1021/jacsau.5c01612 ). In an excellent example of original work in flow photocatalysis,
Luisi, Colella and co-workers report the monofluoroalkylation of an
array of Giese acceptors using visible-light-mediated photoredox catalysis
in continuous flow. Using a transition-metal-free organic photocatalyst,
structurally diverse secondary and tertiary monofluoroalkyl radicals
are accessed from α-monofluorocarboxylic acids, and the mild
conditions employed are shown to enable the late-stage functionalization
of biologically relevant molecules (DOI: 10.1021/jacsau.4c00902 ). Shreeve, Pang, Hu and co-workers report a water-based cascade
reaction to synthesize a new nitrogen-rich energetic compound, 6-amino-7,8-dihydrotetrazolo­[5,1- f ]­[1,2,4]­triazin-8-ol. Using microchannel continuous-flow
technology, their water-based method yielded the product in high purity
and yield, in just a few hours (DOI: 10.1021/jacsau.5c01089 ). Ye, Li and co-workers present a method for the synthesis of twisted
benzo-extended [ n ]­phenacenes using a one-pot, three-component
Suzuki-Miyaura coupling reaction, followed by an electrochemical
flow Scholl reaction (DOI: 10.1021/jacsau.5c00653 ). Su, Fan, Zhong, Pan and co-workers described the development and
use of a stable iron complex with acetonitrile as a labile ligand
and the [Fe 3+ Cl 4 ] - cluster
as the catalytic site. This material behaves as a regenerable photochemical
redox catalyst, producing Fe 2+ and · Cl
radicals for use in reactions such as styrene dichlorination (DOI: 10.1021/jacsau.5c01535 ). Closing out the small molecule work, Liu et al. present a classic
example of catalysis in flow in heterogeneous, gas phase reactions.
In their work, Zn-modified iron-based catalysts were prepared and
used in CO 2 hydrogenation, where they exhibited excellent
selectivity to C4+ linear alpha olefins (DOI: 10.1021/jacsau.5c01605 ).

MULTISTEP SYNTHESES
Building on the numerous examples
of successful synthesis of small
molecules, researchers have spent the past decade developing multistep
syntheses using flow reactors. Wan and Chen demonstrate the power
of multistep synthesis in flow through their total synthesis of (+)-biotin.
They developed a fully coupled continuous-flow regime that enabled
the 13-step asymmetric total synthesis of the target molecule, achieving
a 43% overall yield (DOI: 10.1021/jacsau.5c01570 ). Of note, their process deploys a new chiral auxiliary-controlled
desymmetrization to construct (3a S ,6a R )-lactone in a closed-loop cycle that is able to continuously recycle
the chiral auxiliary. Sasaya, Ishitani and Kobayashi demonstrate the
utility of flow chemistry in their synthesis of the fungicide tetraconazole
(DOI: 10.1021/jacsau.5c01462 ). Using a packed-bed flow reactor
containing a new heterogeneous base catalyst, they achieved high selectivity
in a dehydrative aldol condensation that typically yielded lower selectivity
under batch conditions. Their use of an in-line 200 MHz 1 H NMR spectrometer showed that the flow-induced selectivity was associated
with an accelerated interconversion equilibrium between key intermediates,
enabling a direct elimination pathway. A modular, three-step approach
for the synthesis of γ- and N -substituted γ-lactams
from primary amines and carboxylic acids is reported by Noel et al.
(DOI: 10.1021/jacsau.5c00884 ). Their approach employs deoxygenative
activation of secondary amides using triflic anhydride, a photochemical
silane-mediated radical alkylation, and finally, intramolecular cyclization.
Rapid reaction times and scalable operation are enabled by the additive-free,
continuous-flow photochemical conditions deployed. Bringing together
concepts in multistep flow synthesis, He, Gao and colleagues contributed
a Perspective article describing the challenges of multistep organic
synthesis in flow, including reaction compatibility, step-connection,
material transfer, and flow stability (DOI: 10.1021/jacsau.5c01611 ). The team discusses this wide array of challenges in the context
of their prior flow syntheses of several molecules of interest, including
tiadinil, methiadinil and emamectin benzoate.

POLYMERS AND MATERIALS
In addition to the synthesis
of small molecules, flow chemistry
has been used to synthesize polymers, and polymeric catalysts and
reactors are widely used in the field. Haddleton, Junkers and co-workers
report the photoinduced copper-mediated reversible deactivation radical
polymerization of acrylate monomers using an automated continuous
flow platform that enables rapid kinetic screening via inline NMR
measurements (DOI: 10.1021/jacsau.6c00015 ). Low energy visible light produces polyacrylates using catalytic
amounts of commercially available dyes, yielding full monomer conversion
in only 20 min. Kumar, Junkers and co-workers present the miniemulsion
polymerization of methyl methacrylate in continuous flow, deploying
a spinning disk reactor to create a metastable emulsion and agitated
continuous flow reactors to achieve high throughput (DOI: 10.1021/jacsau.5c01613 ). Sarkar and Harth report the synthesis of block copolymers in flow,
first preparing a semitelechelic poly­(ethylene) in a first flow reactor
through living coordination-insertion polymerization, followed
by ROP in a second flow system to prepare the second poly­(δ-valerolactone)
block (DOI: 10.1021/jacsau.5c01094 ). Weyl and Laroche describe the use of poly­(arylene-ethynylene)­s,
a subclass of π-conjugated polymers, as heterogeneous photocatalysts
(DOI: 10.1021/jacsau.5c01641 ). Studied in both batch and flow
conditions, the authors discuss the opportunities for use of these
catalysts in flow conditions in their Perspective article.

Polymers
can also be used as substrates in flow reactions. As an
example, we consider that polymer circularity and methodologies for
conversion of spent polymers to alternate products have been topics
of intense research in recent years. Jiang, Cai and co-workers present
Pd/Cu catalysts that electrocatalytically convert PET-derived ethylene
glycol into glycolic acid in a membrane-free flow cell electrolyzer
(DOI: 10.1021/jacsau.5c01615 ).

Expanding beyond polymers,
a wide array of other materials have
been synthesized using flow conditions. Several examples covering
the synthesis of catalysts are included in this special issue. Wang,
Zhang and co-workers report the continuous-flow solution plasma synthesis
of oxygen vacancy-rich Au 1 /CeO 2 -Fe single-atom
catalysts and explore their use in the water-gas-shift reaction (DOI: 10.1021/jacsau.6c00158 ). Chen and workers describe a slurry electrolysis strategy for scaling-up
production of Cu nanocatalysts with multigram hourly productivity
in laboratory flow electrolyzers (DOI: 10.1021/jacsau.5c00897 ). They demonstrate good controllability of particle size down to
single atoms by regulating the nucleation and particle growth process
via pulsed electrochemistry, while extending the approach to include
Ag catalysts and Cu/Ag alloys. Carrier-free enzyme immobilization
is a powerful method for creating high-density catalytic architectures
in flow biocatalysis. Niemeyer et al. included a Perspective that
discusses the evolution of the field, covering cross-linked enzyme
aggregates and crystals to biologically derived inclusion bodies,
all-enzyme hydrogels (AEHs), and genetically encoded protein crystals
(DOI: 10.1021/jacsau.5c01595 ).

In the final paper focusing
on materials synthesis in flow, Monbaliu
and co-workers contributed a Perspective covering the evolution of
cadmium chalcogenide quantum dots, with a particular focus on their
synthesis, contrasting organic and aqueous batch approaches and aqueous
continuous flow strategies (DOI: 10.1021/jacsau.5c01449 ). They also highlight opportunities around the integration of automated
machine learning and artificial intelligence approaches with continuous
flow, which is expected to accelerate the discovery, optimization,
and production of functional quantum dots in future technologies.

REACTORS
An array of papers appears in the issue that
address the important
role of the flow reactor in continuous flow synthesis. A methodology
for the functionalization of perfluoroalkoxy coil reactors with different
fluorinated photocatalysts is demonstrated by Baldwin, Swager and
co-workers (DOI: 10.1021/jacsau.5c00804 ). Using either a perylene diimide or poly­(p-phenylene ethynylene)
polymer photocatalyst contained within the reactor using fluorophilic
interactions, they evaluated the efficiency of the reactors in continuous
flow experiments through the [2 + 2] photocycloaddition of 9-vinylcarbazole
(VCZ) using blue and green light (440 and 525 nm). Chen, Liu and collaborators
report the use of hybridizing micro packed-bed and micro tubing reactors
for telescoped multistep flow synthesis (DOI: 10.1021/jacsau.5c00771 ). The telescoped approach integrates sequential reactions into a
seamless sequence without intermediate isolation, enabling the eight
step syntheses of the insecticides cyproflanilide and broflanilide.
Gu, Veettil and coauthors report a method for Ag recovery from end-of-life
silicon solar cells that uses electrolyte jet scanning to enable selective,
rapid Ag recovery while preserving the structural and functional integrity
of the photovoltaic substrate (DOI: 10.1021/jacsau.5c01469 ). The continuous interfacial renewal of the approach overcomes mass-transport
limitations to yield kinetics faster than those of static jet or bulk
electrolysis systems. Pastre, Browne and co-workers reported nickel-catalyzed
Suzuki-Miyaura cross-coupling of aryl chlorides with minimal
solvent using heated, mechanochemical conditions (DOI: 10.1021/jacsau.5c00934 ). Their work includes larger scale experiments using a twin-screw
extruder, with continuous production at scales up to 400 mmol and
65 g isolated product. Shalom, Volokh and co-workers contributed a
Perspective that discusses the transition from traditional batch powder
photocatalysis to scalable continuous-flow photocatalysis using polymeric
carbon nitride (CN) panels (DOI: 10.1021/jacsau.6c00014 ).

Finally, Baumann et al. close out the issue with a Perspective
article discussing the impact of academic/industrial collaboration
in the development of flow technologies (DOI: 10.1021/jacsau.5c01617 ). Taking a case study approach, the authors discuss examples of
thermal, electrochemical and photochemical reactions using a wide
variety of reactors, including both chemical and biological catalysts.
Technological elements enabling efficient flow synthesis, such as
process analytical technologies, automation and data-driven development
are discussed.

Since the early days of the journal, JACS Au has
published contributions on flow chemistry (DOI: 10.1021/jacsau.2c00375 ). We are pleased to extend our coverage of this important topic
via this special issue. We trust that readers interested in flow chemistry
will find a variety of papers in this issue that may pique their interest.
I thank all the authors and reviewers who have contributed to this
issue, and encourage readers to watch for future special issues on
other current and emerging topics.

SECTION
Views expressed
in this editorial are those of the author and not necessarily the
views of the ACS.

SECTION
Published as part of JACS Au special issue “Continuous Flow Chemistry”.